Oh, you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the derivative of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have finished it by its explanations and through its declarations. And it has come to me in vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to everyone, thus the science is lost and hidden, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have made. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is obscured.
Now it seems to me that I want to revive it along with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cauterization, and of the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and of preparation of it, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And it is necessary for one who undertakes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and the movement and rest of the veins, both moving and resting, and from where they issue.
And for this Hippocrates said that the name is not much, and the work is little; and we place in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, should be careful that he does not fall into error and that he does not harm men.
so I have seen many of those who practice this science and if they abandon their knowledge and their experimentation.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut the abscess of scruples or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone of a man with a fistula, and the stone was large; he removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the man was dead within three days.
And I have seen it happen that the vein was called for by the surgeon, and I saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if one cut well he died.
And I saw another physician who took in care the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage a wound;
and the physicians blamed ignorance for holding the breakage on the wound by strong binding, and did not leave the wound to form a scab, and left it thus until the end;
and he commanded that it not be untied;
and remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot, and came to destruction.
I was summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg; and when I had untied it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all along the corruption has already been confirmed in the member, and it cannot be cured.
and the corruption does not cease to spread through the member as long as the member is completely lost.
And you will see another miracle that will dissolve the enclosed abscess, and then will inflame it due to the wickedness of its nature.
For abscess, when it is full of melancholic humor, it does not matter that one touches it with iron if it is not in a place where one can remove all that is corrupted.
And therefore, dear sons, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, attention or there is danger in many arrangements;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Take your arms in caution, and undertake your ailments lightly and firmly, and make use of the better way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised;
and let go of the diseases causing fearful and grievous suffering;
and remove your arms from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says distinctly in some of his admonitions: Do not take a foolish doctor to cure an illness, lest you be called a foolish person.
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about cauterization by fire and also about cauterization by sharp medicine, and it is the chapter organized from the head to the feet;
and of the forms of the instruments, and of the iron tools for cauterization, and of all that which is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and of ulcers and wounds, and of extractions of arrowheads, and similar things;
and the chapters are ordered and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring the dislocations and the twistings, and similar things;
and it is ordered from the lowest part of the feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
Before we begin our work, it is fitting that we describe the quality of aid and the harm of each temperament.
I say that the qualities of aid, and of harm, are a long and subtle discourse and secret response;
and from this speaking the many wise men agree with it;
and do not suffice for them my words, for I reduce the length.
I say that cautery helps universally all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: that is to know the hot and moist complexion, and the dry and moist complexion.
In a hot and dry complexion with assembled matter, they disagreed about nothing and said that cautery is of great aid; and the others said the opposite: that cautery is not suitable for an illness that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure a hot illness with heat, nor with dryness.
and it is far from what they say who claim the opposite, that cautery provides great aid to hot and dry illnesses that occur in the body of men. For when you examine the body of man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times by experience.
And in no way does it interfere with those who have tried it, and who know by long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the experience of the tension;
of other complexions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the members gather and agree with the cauterization.
And know, son, that gathering fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cauterization with burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is burned, and does not harm another member unless by bad name.
The hot medicines come from one member to another by touching, and bring to the sick member diseases of grievous sanitation; and by chance kill the patient.
The fire by its height and by the goodness of its substance does not do evil, if there is not excess.
And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
and for this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I reveal to you the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; Receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and choose taking pains.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden and hidden injuries are better cured with the help of cauterization; and meanwhile the cauterizations are for necessary pains and haste that cannot wait for the time when a greater evil may come to the limb.
And do not think, dear son, as foolish people do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no relapse; and they say it to him thus;
and they say it to him thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are not a medicine that changes the temperament, and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for the haste of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and of its authority.
And it is possible that the disease comes from the patient's temperament and the location of the disease and its strength;
and are gathered in him the excesses by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless fire cauterization is administered to him or he has a little of excess and moisture, such as cauterization of teeth for the pain, and similar things, and that pain does not come back; but that happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures for a disease and they are not effective, then we administer cauterization, and it works.
It appears well that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterizations with instruments of gold are better than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold and because of the height of its substance;
and they said that the places of cauterization do not become infected, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some men;
and cauterizations of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they praised them. And however when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how hot it is by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
and if one heats it too much; it becomes disfigured by the fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
I have organized this chapter from head to foot, because the path should be easier to follow.
These cauteries are good for moisture and for cold on the brain, and in it is done because of the cause of an illness called "soda", and by the cause of many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to a multitude of noises and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and similarly for all illnesses that come from cold such as paralysis and soddeness and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine, cleansing the head three or four times, according to what the strength and the age and the habituation of the patient can endure; and then make the patient relax their head.
And then make them sit crossed between your hands, and put their hands on their chest;
afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and then take your two thumbs, if it bleeds from inside then heat the cautery that is called "olivare", of which this is the form: And put it on the left side of the incision, and make descending and constricting movements with your hand little by little in a twisting manner; then lift your right hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone a little bit; and if you do not see it, restart the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
afterwards take a little wax, and put it in warm and soft cotton inside, and put it on the wound, and let it be for three days;
After a dead person, put a moist cloth on the belly; and let it stay there until the chill is removed; after curing the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healthy.
And the old ones said that the more a wound suppurates, the more it will clean itself; and for this reason it is helped by movement.
And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then scrape away what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
And the others said that one should cauterize so much on it, and hit it so hard that one removes from the bone as large a piece as the buckle that women put on their belts, so that the humors come out freely;
and one must let the wound remain covered for a long time; after that, one must clean and suck it.
And these two kinds of cauterizations do not seem to me to be good in every respect, unless in certain men in whom there is a way of fear;
and it seems to me that I must leave the dead skin;
for the head is weakened by the continuous flow of nature, as we demonstrate in other limbs;
and myself when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more healthy and beneficial for me, and in that case I observe a healthy outcome.
When in the whole head there comes chronic pain, and it lasts a long time, then the patient must use hiera and pills which are called "cochia", and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if they do the cauterization that we have said before, it is of no value. Take care that the head of the sick person's arm is of strong nature, and that it not be too cold; then cauterize the finger with the same cautery that we have spoken of above. Afterwards do the cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and do the cautery on the spot which is called "vasselz". and it is the place where one applies warm poultices; and lead your hand so that you do not see to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form:
of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head there comes sudden pain, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with medicines that cleanse, and one has done the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases, and all this does not help. then one makes cauteries according to two methods, that is to say with hot medicine and with fire.
The cautery of hot medicine is that you take a handful of alum, and remove the outer layer and scrape it from the head, and then make an application on the temple where the pain is held in such a manner that you can apply the handful of alum under the skin.
and when it is applied, bind it and constrain it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; and then unbind it and pull out the handful of alum, and leave the wound thus for 2 or 3 days; Then put a needle on the ankle, thrusting it into the flesh until the marrow can be extracted.
After the treatment of a fracture, as long as it is healing;
and if you see that I have written about certain burning medications, or the treatment of burning medications.
The cauterization with iron is according to this method. Heat the cauterizer of which this is the form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a nail or it has little curvature, and in the middle has a small appearance;
and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little gently, until the half of the spear head that is to be cauterized is dry;
and raise your hand so that the artery does not become inflamed, which is deplorable, and causes an abundance of blood to flow.
After put cotton in a ditch of seat, and put sewer on the place for three days; then I put moist cotton on the wound, and then treat the place with oil until it is healthy;
and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery that is called "cultellare", to the entire point, and beware of touching the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
of the migration
When you treat migration as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the previous saying of medicine and of iron does not suffice for it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery that is called "cultellare" until it becomes white;
and sign thus on the aching place a line of half a thumb in length, and put your hand once, and strain that you do not touch the artery and that you do not approach the bone;
And beware of the jaw that moves when one chews, and the nerves do not have regard for what moves and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the decrement of blood from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting that causes great fear and discomfort to the one who does not know it, and who is not a studied and experienced person. and leave the work in the middle of the way;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is helpful.
And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have spoken of in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cauterization that has two blades; and is this cautery better than the others and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold.
When pain from cold comes in the ear, and one has opened it with solutive medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", of which this is the form:
After puncturing all around the ailing ear, or around the two where the pain is held in both, and one extracts a little from beneath the root of the ear after you have signed the place of the wound; and let there be X points around each ear;
after the cure, the place as long as it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by a cautery is not other than those which move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of the diseases;
and do not perform cauterization on similarities that come from hemorrhoids and spasms of the kidneys.
When you treat this kind of torture that comes from flow of blood and purging of the head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little behind the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips;
and put the cauterization on the part that brings forth blood, and make him be cauterized behind the head of the ear a little above the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cauterization on for as long as it seems to you that the heart is being loosened;
and this is the form of the cauterization:
And it is similar to the scalpel that we previously mentioned, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the blade be a bit thicker;
After curing the limb as I have previously said, as long as it is healthy.
When a head injury is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauterizations: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the vessel which is called "hazels" as we have previously said, and the fourth cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be cured as we have previously said.
of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient great and pills which purify the brain;
After the patient has risen from their bed, and you have put on their occipital bone an emplaster of sinusitis that is written in the treatise of emplasters;
and this is the manner of the cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If he is healed in that place, it is good; and if he is not, then have three cauteries made on the middle of the head descending to the neck, and let there be a space of two fingers between each cautery;
and cure it like the others, and if you see that it is swollen, and the patient is suffering, then have one cautery made in the middle; and if it is necessary, two others on the two corners, and cure until he is healed;
and let these cauteries be called "olivare", as I have previously said.
It is necessary that the head be anointed with herbs and with what we have previously mentioned;
afterwards anoint the head of the patient, then make him a cauterization in the middle of the head and on each horn, and on the back and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you are a skilled artisan, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the worst of the fever is gone, and lift your hand; after the treatment until he is healthy, and let it be the cauterizations that are called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not undergo cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first anoint the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient has great and suffering pain to take medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, have them gargle and chew soothing the brain often with good meat.
After the king of the head in the middle, and have the cautery done according to what we said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffering, have them undergo cauterization as I said for the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let them be cauterized with olive oil according to the manner that I said.
If the patient is an infant, have them undergo a subtle cautery in this manner:
When because of melancholy the humors are excessive or the moistures corrupted and the phlegm thick, then the cautery of such cauteries as we said for the one who has paralysis.
And if it is due to the cause of melancholy that the superfluous humors are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then one must give a drink of something by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been stated previously in the division.
After reaching the head of the patient; after making a plaster of linen, well done, like a circle, put it on his head;
and the patient should be well crossed, and held firmly from all sides;
after applying the plaster, and it is of no use to anoint with butter of old barley; and heat it with tempered fire, so that the pain can be endured by the patient; after having seen the circle within his head, and let it cool down;
and do this to the patient every week once with good governance until they are healthy.
Or you will see it cauterized where you make several points all around the cautery.
This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally;
and then put on cotton wet in butter and in fat of geese.
of the ache of the eyes When ache first comes to the eyes by the signs that I have told in the division, then anoint and give to drink to the patient thing cleansing the head, and the warm of all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe several times while fasting.
After command to rub his head, and make him cauterize in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descension of the ache is to the two eyes together, or in one if the descension is in one;
and let the cautery reach all the veins and arteries that are disordered beneath the heart, and be the cautery long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of decrement of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stain it with earth powder as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and in the incision of the cautery how you will stop them;
and sometimes they perform a cautery or a branding under the two bones of the back.
and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then have the cautery done which I spoke of at the beginning of the treatise concerning the eyes: I apply cautery to the head, and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or branding irons under the two bones; and if it is necessary to brand more, then cauterize gently above the eyebrow with one small cautery.
When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give the patient three nutmegs to drink; after the king of the head, and have it cauterized with half a cautery of olive oil; and make two cauteries from the cautery called "clavilis" above the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrows;
and beware of the artery that you do not cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cauterization that is called "olivare". because of what this form is:
And if you see that it makes two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not let your hand be still unless until the third part of the skin is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
of hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into a membrane, and prick the eye, and one makes cauterizations in two ways: it is to know by fire, or by burning medicine.
For the fire cauterization, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even; and if they prick at their birthplace, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then put the patient in a healthy condition; afterwards sign on the skin of the eyes a figure that is as small as the funnel of the nose, and let the beginnings of the sign be among the hairs;
then put moist cotton in a glass of oil and anoint the eyelid with the juice of the pear, then heat the cautery of what is its form:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the heart is set on fire in that place;
and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the skin pulled back, and the hairs lifted to the tip of the eyelid;
Then lift your hand, and let it be for three hours, then put moist cotton in a poultice as long as the numbness is removed; after the treatment of the joint until it is healthy.
And after that come the hairs, and the skin is softened then reapply the cautery to the same place, just as you did previously;
and if the hairs are deformed, then cauterize until the skin is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The medical cauterization of burning is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make from parchment the shape of a leaf of myrtle;
then take French soap and lively chalk, of each one ounce, and mix together well; and make it hasten, so that it does not become cold, then put it on the shape that you have made like the mold of the eye, and apply it to the skin of the eyes; and if the illness is in one eye only, then one should treat in one, and if it is in both eyes; and put cotton wet with water on the eye;
and let the head of the sick person be in a warm place and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the poultice and wet the mouth every time the sick person feels burning from the medicine, for it feels burning also like fire.
When you have applied this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the burning sensation has passed, then lift the skin of the eye, and look to see if the skin is lifted like it was lifted by contraction of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, it is good.
If not, then again put the medicine on the place where the medicine has not been applied, so that your operations are equal, and your eyes are aimed at the point;
then put on a cotton cloth moistened in broth so that the bitter hearts are cooled, after treating the place of the joint which is called "diaphragm" and others, until it be sound.
And if it is necessary that you take good care with your work, by great care that it not happen that the point of the medicine comes to the eyes.
And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, then reapply the medicine to that place which is softened by the proper skin, thus as you have done before; after the treatment until it is healthy;
and it is the form of the mortar of the dead:
And it is known that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this will be their conceptions;
and let not the right way be hidden from the one to whom is the study of this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the classification of diseases, and your treatments are not profitable, then it is necessary that you do cauterization in this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your shoulder; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it bow its head;
afterwards put moist cotton in the hollow of the eye or juice of persicary on the eye;
After the heat of the cautery which is applied:
and it is shaved on the head in the shape of a wing of a dove, along with which is the cautery;
if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent;
but in any case, that which is shaved serves for your work.
After the fistula has been covered with a dressing, and in it put the poultice, and the dried; and it is closed, thus the operation, and put outside the dressing;
after putting on the hot cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail from beneath the oil, so that your hands do not make a fool; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you apply the cautery just to the bone, it would be good. If not, then restart the cautery once more, and also if you are a master of the profession, and let it be for three days;
After I put on a moist cotton cloth, and the treatment of the dislocation of the bone lasts as long as it is healthy, and if forty days pass and it is not healthy, then I put on a medicine, a corrosive ointment, until the bone is uncovered; and the treatment according to what will be treated in its chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Cut into the fistula, and make the place; afterwards put in the incision a thin rod of wax, of which this is the form: and they make a quantity of a .Z. of poultice; and hold the hand or wrist firmly, and do not move the patient's joints, so that the applied poultices do not fall from their place;
and it is suitable to put on the patient's oil cotton wool soaked in sheep's urine or in water:
the poultice if it is applied near the place of the fistula, and the sound tissue through miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have spoken of, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a probe to the navel, and to bring the fistula to the body of the navel according to what is suitable in its own place.
of cracks in the lips Many times there occur cracks in the lips which are called "poil", and also in the lips of infants.
When you treat these cracks of that which we have spoken of in divisions, and the treatment is not beneficial, then heat a small cautery iron according to this form:
And insert it hastily into these cracks until it reaches the source;
After treatment, anoint the limb with cerote until it is healthy.
When an abscess forms in the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate, or the roots of the teeth, after having made putridity and rottenness and it becomes swollen and develops into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it is not beneficial: then it is necessary that you apply the cautery according to the size of the fistula; after closing or puncturing the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot at the source of it, and on the rear of the limb;
and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is thus cured, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it is not effective, then put the head of the patient in a healthy position; after heating the cautery whose form will come here after in such a manner that you put a chain on the tooth;
and put the hot cautery between the teeth hastily, and hold it so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
After lifting your hand and reapplying the cauterization according to your will;
After the patient has filled his mouth with salty water, and holds it for an hour and spits it out frequently.
And in the same way the tooth that was loose is confirmed, and the gum is softened and restrained, and the decaying moisture is dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or fever, and medical treatments are of no value, then it requires cauterization in two ways: and cauterization with a borings tool and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with a borings tool is such that you hold a borings tool of iron or steel, and the tip in an iron or copper skimmer; After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a stick, and moistening it in borings tool oil, and applying it to the aching tooth quickly and holding it until it is cooled;
and thus do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see a wool or cotton in cold butter, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the hot iron as long as the fetid discharge comes from the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you should press an iron or copper cane, and it should be thick so that the fetid discharge does not come to the mouth of the patient;
after heating the cautery, from which the form will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled;
do this often, for the pain will be gone the next day or the day after.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the application of this cautery, and then pull out the tooth.
and it is the form of the cauterization:
And perform cauterization on the head that you want, and according to what you have the power to do;
and it is the form of the cane:
of the scrofula When the scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cauterized head from which afterwards comes the form, and it has two openings for the humors to exit on the cauterization of the other part;
and put the hot cauterization on the abscess once, or as the art is, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small then put cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in this way for three days; and put on cotton moistened with butter until the abscess is opened;
after the cure of the limbs and of tents until it be healthy.
When the humors prevail over the channels of the womb, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by solvent medicines;
after they do a cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you not come near the throat, and do not put heat on it except for a little.
After they do another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be which are called "clavicle" from which we have the shape in front;
and cure the limb as we have said before until it be healthy.
When the tumor and illness of the lung are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or cough, and the illness is ancient, then apply two cauterizations on the ribs in the affected places; and another cauterization between the two breasts in the chest;
and let the cauterization be that which is called "clavicle" according to the shape that was previously described.
And if you see it, apply cauterization by pricking all of the cauterization that is called "points" because of the shape which was previously described in the illness of the ears;
and let the points be thirty, or as many as needed.
After healing the back according to what was previously said, and let the cauterization be at three ribs according to this shape:
And therefore are the cauterings less severe, because you make three at one time.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards the patient feels better on his back and on his side; after lift the heart that is within the tickled area of your left hand fingers;
and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cauterization which has two nerves where it is the form:
and cauterize the heart as long as it penetrates to the side, and comes the figure of the cauterization together with four cauterizations;
and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery that has III nerves, because the figure of cauterization is thus six cauteries;
and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a thread and it's the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
And sometimes it is adjusted on this one nerve, because it has eight cauteries.
Afterwards put on the cautery rough threads with wax; after make the patient rest, and not move the limbs by long tension until it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated upwards, little matter what happens next, then make a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries by pricking.
For the joint is re-formed, and the moisture is stopped and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach there come chills and many humors as it withdraws from its complexion, and are multiplied the cathars to it, and in manners of accustomed cures and it does not profit at all, then it is necessary that the patient be warmed on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands. Of this have made three cauteries on the buttocks for the quantity of an egg, and all the cautery is placed, and two cauteries under the two ribs as many as the figure of the cauteries will be at three angles, and let there be space between one and another so that they are not joined together when they will suppurate;
and let the cautery be so deep that it pierces the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you see a cautery of a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cautery, let the cautery be applied by pricking and marking on the stomach at the point according to the quantity that you see of the weakness; then apply the cautery to all the areas which are called "poins".
After the treatment of the wound that we had before, as long as it is healthy.
When to the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is excessively mixed out of its natural composition by the superfluities; and the patient is treated for what we have said in sections, and it does not profit him, thus it is necessary that the patient be warmed on his liver; and mark the weakness with three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, below the hypochondries, where the pain or the ache of the stomach comes;
and have a space between each cautery the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too much on the entire cautery;
and let it be burned just enough to cauterize the heart, and let the patient stand upright on his feet;
and if he cannot, then let him sit, and stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms;
And if it is your will, then cauterize these cauteries of the cutaneous layer, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would dry out the entire body; and that it does not come near to the navel, for the heart is very subtle in that place, and one must be cautious to see;
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, he feels a very sharp pain.
And when this treatment of the abscesses is done, it is necessary that the patient be supported on his head;
and then mark from below the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a razor, whose form is this: And cauterize the cautery until the flesh is burned, and come up to the sphincter, until the pourette is entirely purified;
after the treatment according to the treatment of the sores as long as it is healthy;
and it is not necessary that anyone use this cautery except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have been cured many times.
Then it can hardly work, and yet it seems to me that moving is better than letting it be.
against the cauterization of the pleura
The old ones said that one should do to the pleura cauterizations of roots of aristolochia, and in such manner: Take a root of aristolochia as long, the largest that you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your fingers; and put it in oil, and dip it in fire, and cauterize the cauterization between the shoulder and the neck, and make two small cauterizations slightly descending on the part that is below the beard;
and make two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little backwards; and one cauterization in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest opposite the cauterization which is between the shoulders;
and do not press your hand, but make an opening as with an aromatic.
And some ancient ones said that no man should use the fire cauterization on the razor and warm it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and the pain would cease, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear that the patient will die now, or a fistula will come which cannot be healed.
of the bladder
When you treat the disease of the bladder according to what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit him, then they apply three kinds of cauterization that are good.
One manner is that you make three or four cauterizations, burning according to the length of the bladder, according to the shape of the liver cauterization that we have spoken of before;
and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be seated behind his back;
and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and raise the heart which is near the thigh, where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevation that you raise the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After that, burn the two nerves inflamed until the heart is perceived from the other side, and then withdraw the cautery, and thus in it will have four.
And if you see that, cauterize the entire cautery on three nerves.
After the treatment when he has obtained purification by long stretching, and it is better than the other treatments mentioned before.
Cautery is not suitable for dropsical people, except in the manner which is called "ascites".
When you treat according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit them, then it is necessary that you do four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the right side of the chest. and let the cauteries be well pressed near the thickness of the heart.
After leaving the cautery open to obtain purification by long stretching, and do not abandon the treatment of the disease after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with the aid of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the spoon that we have shown before. and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been previously described.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and full of watery citrine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and the anular; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deep, lest the watery citrine be stirred up, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After that, make on each leg two cauteries at the point of the cuticle. and let the cauterizations of the thigh be one side of the knee in front and the other behind, on the leg;
and leave the cauterizations exposed for a long time without dressing, until they heal;
after the treatment of other treatments that we have spoken of.
When a disorder of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, then perform a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before about the cauterization of the stomach, with circular cauterization; and 4 subtle cauterizations around the navel to each subtle clavicle cauterization, and 2 cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, have them cauterized on the finger, and have the cautery on each nail, and have two small cauteries on the stomach below the great, for the treatment is profitable when it has good aid.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or several, and are old and are of thick cold and moist humors corrupted, and are curable as we have said in sections, and it does not profit at all, make a cautery: Three on the spine of the back, which is entirely divided into sections, little by little in a triangular shape, and make one cautery under the navel, and two on the buttocks;
and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face swell, then have a large cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cauteries of the clave; and let the cauterized area stay stretched tight. After the cure, leave it alone as long as it is healthy.
When you cut into the thelul, if you warm up the cauterized iron that seems to ease it, and then apply it all wrapped up onto the cut thelul; and let your hand be so that the cauterization comes to the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows out;
do it one or two times, and if there is a lot of thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of profitable joints as long as they are healthy;
and if you cauterize with a large cauterizer on the achates, it will have more aid.
When the patient cannot endure surgery or cauterization, which we will relate in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed unless by cauterization.
When there is an abnormal growth of a fistula, and it is inflamed and infected with rotten and corrupted matter, then the doctor must test all around with a subtle probe, and take care to know all around how deep the probe goes.
After heating the cauterizer which seems to be at a comfortable temperature, and thrust it into the fistula according to the quantity that the probe has entered, and reapply the cauterizer as long as those rotten and corrupted parts are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of their need.
and beware of the nerves that are irritated, and of the large veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestines, beware of these places, and do not make those false passages that are in the body of the charcoal, and think that it is not a perforating thing;
After the cure, the body is healthy as long as it is sound, and if the places are healed, and the materials are pulled for a long time, then they are dry, that the body is entirely healthy;
and if the materials are not pulled, it means that the body is hoarse and rotten, and the bone is corrupted at the source; and thus like one of those things that we will tell about in his body.
When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and of great swelling, and does not take a woman's temperament, then it is necessary that you do cauterization on the kidneys on one side and on the other with the cauterizing iron that we have previously mentioned;
and if we apply the cauterizations to the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will be of greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and chilly from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply cautery to the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, on the right and left, and let each cautery be as long as a finger;
and have one cautery on the back, or two if you are in a bind;
and let the cauteries be fixed according to the previously described form.
When the thigh is cold and moist, and does not allow for it to conceive because of this, and the flesh is corrupted and its limits are delayed; and when they come, they feel great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauterizations around the belly, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back;
and let the cauterizations be done with a key, as we have said.
When the viscous humors descend to the box of the thigh, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
and the places of separation are found, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the box of the thigh with a cauterization similar to a circle, and mark in front of the place around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle;
and if there are cauteries such as those for which one cauterizes the stomach.
And if there are no cauteries present, then make three cauteries of the large olive tree, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the abscesses;
and heal them until they are healthy.
of the pain of the thigh When pain comes to the thigh, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the section and the cure is not effective, and the illness is chronic: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick foul humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills. After you make a cauterization;
and the method of cauterizing is according to two methods: It is to know assemblage of burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is done in many ways, of which one is thus:
that you cauterize on the box of the flanks three triangular cauteries in this form, and make a deep and large hole, and let there be between each cauterization the thickness of an egg, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
sometimes one does a cauterization in the middle of the head of the flanks, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see that it is cauterized with a circular cauterization that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the flanks;
but make it in such a way that the circles contain the entire flank, and all the spaces of the heart be dry.
And this is the method one uses for sciatica, when the pain is in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg.
And if it reaches the knee and the leg, have two cauteries made there where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle four fingers, on the left side a little;
and let the cauteries be shallow, and let the thickness of the scar be according to the curvature;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers or near the navel, then cauterize there where he feels the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "points". And if it is necessary, have more made;
and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, have a cauterization made with a shallow or circular cauterization, and take great care in all your cauteries that you not leave so much of the cauterization that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more nuisance and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have performed cauterization on the leg near the foot, and they let it go so long that the leg became totally swollen, and the foot also, and was pierced and corrupted to the bottom of the foot. After a bowel movement from which he got death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cauterization on one and on the other, in this manner.
And the wise men said in the cauterization of the thigh, that this is the method, make an iron instrument and let it be as thick as a small nut or a little less, and let it be hollow and the space from one hollow to the other be the size of a walnut.
and let the hollows be open on two sides, and also be like nuts, and have an iron handle well made;
and it is the form:
And let it be heated until it is entirely red and hot to the touch, and then apply it to the affected side of the patient's thigh, and turn on the healthy side of the body;
and let the cautery be applied once, and the dressing remain for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound be covered with it for a long time; after the treatment of the shoulder until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly because of its danger, and few see those who use it;
and nevertheless this is one of the good cauteries, which one can suffer, and where it adheres to.
The medical cauterizing instrument is such that you make between the joints an instrument in which descends the margin of the door, and it should be of copper or iron with a long blade, and in height it has two nuts, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and are open upwards and downwards, and join together according to this form:
Afterwards place on the box of the thigh to the patient gazing upon his healthy side, and press your hand much on the box of the thigh; afterwards put between the two circles of the warm water which has been heated by the fire a little, and let it for an hour or ten, and let the patient suffer from the heat and the burning of it.
For there is found mortification as if from fire;
and when the mortifications have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the thigh of warm water, and let it be for three hours, and put on a poultice as long as what is black from the eschar remains; and let it remain for three hours that the rotting is in a strap;
and this would be the last aid after the treatment of ouching parts as long as it is healthy.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, have made the instrument that holds according to what you have done on the same side of the hip;
and this is the manner of the warm water, and I have written it in the treatise of the correction of medicine. Take alkaline and living lime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. or it should have a small hole there so that the point of a needle can enter;
or it should have a small hole there so that the point of a needle can enter; and put that pot in another pot well plugged, and put on it the alkaline and lime and sweet water, as much as there should be two fingers of the powders when you have well pressed with your hand;
and let it be so until it descends into the water and takes hold of a cup or a lead weight, then take all that water, and cast it on hot coals and on quicklime as before.
And then it will be very sharp and is administered in many works of medicine and in cauterizations of other limbs.
For it does work like fire, and also other medicines that one cauterizes well the thigh thus with thesis and myrrh and lime with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure in which a man was cured of the pain of the thigh and of the sciatic vein, and praised it much, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healthy at once when this cure was done, and he had bathed as he teaches hereafter.
And it is applied in a manner that you press green fresh and dry litharge, and you bruise it much with a piece of fat, and put it on the thigh and on the thigh muscle and on the leg where the pain is, and the injury;
and let it be for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then make him enter into a bath until the body is somewhat warmed, and make him enter into bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healthy.
And be aware that one should not use cauterization of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a fig leaf, it helps much;
and the cauterization should be done in such a manner. Take the wool and the fat of old oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb of the foot and the other called the heel.
Take dry fibers of goat's kidney, and dip them in fire until they are charcoal, and then put them on the wool, and let it be until it is stained.
and do it again thus, and do not cease to do it thus until you think by sensation that it comes near the skin, and that the pain is eased;
and this manner of cauterization is called "cauterization of the goat".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, either from a blow or from percussion or from excessive evacuation, or from similar matters of cold and spread material, none of these things is worthy of cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold material.
It is necessary after this that the patient is freed from foul-smelling pills or similar things, that one applies to their back, where the pain is, three signed lines of enchantment, and in each line a cautery or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer;
and let the cautery be made according to the cautery that is called "branding";
and if you see fit, make three or four cauteries at the middle clavicle according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to little children, and the signs of the affliction are that they have a constricted arm when they lift it, and fear; and you will find in the upper part of the spine of the back and in the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize it with a cautery according to this form. If the cautery takes hold of each part of the spine equally.
And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a cautery that pricks two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another.
After the cure, anoint the limb until it be healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in angularity which is near a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints is caused by moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the physicians properly call "podagra", and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner:
Make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is a swelling that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cauterization at the entire spot where one calls «point». And if the pains come near the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cauterization on each knee three or four cauterizations of each part, all olive-shaped;
and if you are a master of more, if you make more, but do not hold your hand further than until the expectation of the heart is dry.
And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, then administer the cauterization that we have spoken of in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make pricks around the forearm two lines;
and if it remains a point of pain at the elbow, then make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come near the skin or near the muscles, then cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and think of medicines.
For if you make good governance for him and you purge his phlegm, then he will be healthy with the help of God.
When a rupture comes to the entrails, and the bowels descend to the groin and it is a novelty, then it is necessary that when you cure the wound, he does not urinate that day; and that he uses things that loosen the stomach, so that the flatus descends from his stomach;
afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his belly as long as the bowels are being repaired, and apply them to your fingers, and anoint with oil under the rupture on the bone of the hip, and put a sign that is similar to half a circle above the navel;
then apply the cautery to the place where the form is
as long as it is white and throws out tendons. Then put back the intestines in their place; and let the assistants hold their hands on them so they do not turn back;
and open well the thighs of the patient, and put one cushion and one sheet on the thighs, and another on the chest who holds the hands;
then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then start again another time until you come to the bone; and take care subtly that the intestine does not protrude when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that because of this the patient does not die, or other evil.
And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to the measure of their bones, and of large people also large according to their measure;
after three days cure the limb from the cautery of butter until the scab is formed;
after the cure of other ulcers until it be healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well dried;
and it is necessary that his bandages be tied loosely, so that the belly does not protrude when he goes to the chamber.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let a well-made poultice be applied to him, and for forty other days;
and let it have good rest, so that it works little and guards against too great a repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high a breath;
and when it makes this teaching then it is entirely healthy.
And I will speak after the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
When ruptures come in other bellies and are connected, and you see that they do not grow anymore, have it cauterized with a cauterization iron according to its quantity, and let the third of the heart be scarred; after the treatment according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with a cauterizer at three angles according to this form:
but first mark the place of the wound and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold in hand the entire cauterizing iron.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and softer.
of pain in an old member When pain comes in any member, from a fall or from a blow, and this pain lasts a long time, and the treatment with medicine is of no use, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poins", and let the cautery be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its strength and its location of torsions and of its pain.
if it is healed from the first cauterization, that's good;
if this does not work, recommend another cauterization on that one, for such is the custom that it must be changed in the member that is closest to it, because it is necessary that you do the cauterizations as long as the patient is not healed.
The mixtures are aided sometimes by cauterization with great help, and also the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you wish to cauterize, beware that the illness is at its beginning, and if it is curable according to what we have said in the division, and does not worsen nor deteriorate, and you doubt that the corruption will not infect the whole disease, then make a cauterization on the head. Put one end at the nape of the neck, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the temples, and one behind on the occiput;
and let it be so that the cauterization reaches just to the bone, and as long as the crusts come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can exit;
and the cautery on the mouse according to what is before it.
And if the mixture is scattered all around; and it does manifestly, then you must apply the cautery of these cauteries that we have spoken of in the head, and one cautery on the nape of the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the thorax and another below, and two on the shoulders; and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and of the feet, and on the palms of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the rear calf, that you not burn them;
and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the fist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more I do of cauterization, the more I do to help, and it brings him profit;
and you should know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cauterization as much as they feel it, because their body is already totally corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the cases.
After the cure, treat the wound with flour of wheat with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When inflammation comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauterizations on the limb according to its size and smallness.
and let the cauterization be a little deep into the thickness of the skin; then heal the joints as long as they are healthy.
And sometimes one performs cauterization on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is a bone that has become inflamed;
and however does not interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "paralysis" has taken hold, and the instruments of medicine are of no use, then cauterize with a cauter a little deeply, according to the quantity of the thickness of the chest, until the flesh is burned and its color is changed;
then heal with a paste made from breadcrumbs and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of dove and blood of swallow, taking each a part; and let it be mixed all together, and let it be tied with a cloth, and let it be hung on the leg as long as it is healthy.
the treatment of cancer by cauterization
When cancer first appears, and you want to stop it, then cauterize with a cauterizing iron which seems to encircle, all around the tumor of the cancer.
And the wise men said that one should make a cauterization in the middle of the cancer;
and yet it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen many times;
and a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cauterizing iron that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
When some people have an illness called "adubelati", and it slows down movement or because of the excess that it creates or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you hasten the stoppage of movement: then you cauterize around a lot of small cauters by pricking; after that, leave it thus. For it hastens to stop moving.
And if you see it pierce through the entire cauter, then heat the cauter of the material that is its form:
And put your hand in the midst of that illness which is called "adubelati" until the cauters have pierced the heart, and let the cauters be such that the patient feels relief in some manner so that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
After the treatment until he is perfectly healthy.
Another kind of illness is what is called "corrosive" disease, and it is nothing other than a wound to a limb, for it eats away the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cauterization with fire together, then heat the cauterizing irons very small and large, according to what is needed for the person or where the disease is.
After the cauterization of all parts, as long as you eradicate all the corruption, and none of it remains, that all that is corrupted be removed.
And then let it be for three days, and apply to the cauterized limbs a soothing balm with oil, until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of painful wounds, there is generated heat.
And if you see that after three days healthy flesh does not grow, it's a good sign;
and if it does not, then reapply the cautery to that which remains corrupted of the limbs.
And this treatment has often been cured by sharp medicine instead of cautery of fire;
but nevertheless the cautery of fire is of greater aid, and I have already spoken of the treatment with sharp medicine in the division: take the quantity that you need for your craft.
of pores that come to the feet Many times it happens that to the feet by default is born a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and is a gross faulty thing that afflicts the foot.
And the cauterization of this disease is according to two methods. It is known as cauterization by fire, and cauterization by hot water.
Cauterization by fire is that you heat the cauterizing iron as if it were a pen of wool, and let it be made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the nail on all sides, and that it has subtle edges;
Afterwards, place all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it stay thus three hours until it induces the beginning of suppuration; then make a plaster of crushed wild mallows mixed with oil, and let the plaster stay on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots.
Then cure the joint by anointing with warmth as long as it is healthy.
And if they are affected by various sores on the body, and often occur in the hands and feet, then you should apply cauterization with warm water; and it is in a similar manner: take a chain of iron or a bar of steel, and put it on the nail and the elbow, that is to say for removing warts; and put the chain on it so that it embraces all around, then you put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand turning it so that the margin of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and then find the warm water penetrating just to the root;
and let the patient suffer a little the burning of the warm water for an hour; Then let it be, and it will tear out everything with all its roots.
Do this after another, as long as you extract all those that are in the body, then cure the unctions which cause the fever.
When some tremble with cold or with nerves, or with quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you do four cauterizations or four on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebra; and one cauterization on the foot, and one on the stomach with olive cauterization;
it will stop the trembling, and hasten the health from the cold illness.
Sometimes appear through the skin ulcers, or boils that produce pus, which come from corrupted thick matter.
If it is necessary first when they appear to make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization with the nest of a dead tree worm, from which the point is taken to be seared by fire, or from the root of long aristolochia, or with the lens-shaped cauterizer.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow in front, but are broken up the excesses from which they come, and are made healthy;
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to dislocate
And however when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your second finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very firmly until the blood is stilled beneath your finger, and so that nothing more comes out;
then apply to the fire the olive cauteries, many small and large ones as long as they are quite red;
then take I, either large or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is cut, and apply the cautery on that vein where you hold with your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is restrained.
And if it should flow when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stemmed;
and beware that you do not injure the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come to the patient;
and be aware that when one is deprived of the skill of an artery, one cannot well restrain it especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods that we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treatable, or by a strong tightening of a thread, or by medications applied which have the power to restrain blood; and let it be bound and constrained firmly.
For one who administers a tight binding of dressings or of putting hot things on, or other similar things, it is of little profit if not done properly.
And if it happens to anyone and he does not have a doctor or medicine present, then he should put his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it is restrained both above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the joint, but rather apply cold moisture often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stiffened;
and make inquiries beforehand about those things for which there is need of cauterizations and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease for which it is suitable to apply a fire cauterization, or a hot medicine, and the organs and the causes and the humors and the forms of the cauterizations;
and I have placed that chapter concerning the head down to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method for what one finds more easily what one desires.
And thus I begin with this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one concerning cauterizations, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you that you do not undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for a cure. if there come those who so aggravate themselves with their disease that they die easily because of the force of the treatment that they receive for their disease, and from the greatness of their evil; and one should have fear of these.
And to those who give their opinion, and say: wait, I am ready"; and the disease is contemptible.
It does not matter to you that you are seen by those who come to you with this condition, but put greater concern in your honor than in your gain, and do not open foolishly but wisely about the things of which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and profits.
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored;
and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and lasting memory.
Dearest son, Our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter for you by dividing it into chapters, according to what it is before the chapter on cauterizations, which I have divided for you from head to feet, so that you find more easily what you will need.
It is known that this disease often occurs in infants due to the nurse holding the infant's head too tightly;
and sometimes it happens for a hidden reason that one is not aware of.
And I have never seen this disease except in infants, and most of those that I have seen died quickly. and for this reason it seems to me that it is better for me to omit the work in some treatments.
And I saw an infant whose head was full of pus, and the head became so swollen each day that it could not be supported;
and the moisture increased so much that it became a tumor, and this tumor is gathered beneath the bone on the spine, between the heart and the bone;
and the work is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make in the head a large incision;
and let it be as long as two of us, until the moisture runs;
and see to it the form of a spatula;
If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see the sutures of the head opened on each side, and the water jumps up when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not seem to be an answer: then it is necessary that you make in the head three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract the moisture entirely from outside. After constricting the fissures of bandages and powders, and put wine and oil, and let it be like that until the fifth day;
Then undo it, and treat the wound with dressings and with ointments, and let the head of the diseased limb be constricted, and give to eat to the patient dry victuals of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incising is that you look at the extent of the abscess, and the gathering of the pus;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then the place where the abscess is open, and the filling of the pus, and make the incision according to that which you have the power;
and beware that you do not cut the artery; and let flow a little blood, so that the patient dies from lack of blood and from evacuation of moisture.
When there is a certain disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the chest, and the disease is chronic, and the treatment with medicine is of no benefit, then the last resort for a cure is cauterization with what one cuts the two arteries.
It is necessary then, when you cut the veins, that the patient makes his head recline; after rubbing the limb with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, then the patient tightens his neck against the whole cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the limbs on one side and the other are behind the ears, and are a little relaxed;
Then sign the limbs of the enclosure, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula on both sides, as long as the tail vein goes to the bone, and that which is by the wide part of the head.
And if you see, remove the spatula from beneath the artery and cut above, carving just as the two veins across.
And when the vein is cut, then the blood jumps up continually outside.
And if the artery does not appear on feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign the enclosure and make it go to the bone;
and that which is necessary to put blood outside if it is six scruples, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery;
then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone at the pointed edge of the shin, if the pus does not come from the abscess, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of the application as long as it is not healthy.
of migration When ancient migration comes, and sharp catarrh, for the moisture of tears and the heat in temples and old chronic weakness and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medical cures and all that does not profit him, then let us cauterize the arteries of the temples and the cautery.
And the way of extraction is that the patient makes to grow the hairs on his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little pushed further than in some men who are too cold;
and if it is put back, then remove the patient's neck from some cloths, then rub the limb with a coarse cloth, and wrap the limb in warm clothes as long as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which is the shape: then scratch the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then pull it high with pincers, and separate it well from the tissues that are joined to each part;
and if the artery is subtle, then turn it to the point of the nail, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two heads. For if it is not cut, then the blood does not cease at all in any way.
And let out blood of the sixth degree, up to the third;
and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with two threads of strong double silk thread, which will prevent the coming of purulence before the constriction of the wound, and the coming of discharge of blood;
Then cut the superfluity that is between the two veins in that same hour, and then, if you see, if the cautery of the cautery iron touches the bone as long as the heads are cut.
and it is a mother of work, if the patient has no fever and he is of a hot complexion. For the cauteries are an aid to end the ulcers: because it is of greater aid for the ulcers.
Where it is necessary by the extraction of the arteries that one fills the vein with old cotton and puts it on well-made tents;
and when one unwinds them, let them be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until they are healed;
and without cutting the artery as long as you work, if you hasten to cure by cautery, or you fill the vein with vitriol and strain it with your hand so that the blood is congealed; and if you do not have a poultice at hand, then put your finger on the spot until the blood is congealed, and raise the limb from cold water as long as the blood stops, and hold it steady as is necessary;
And there should be between the two incisions an instrument of gross thickness, and then when you have signed to cut the two limbs, and you put the iron burning on until it comes near the bone, and cut the vein in the two limbs; and should be separated between the two parts for it is not sweet to be burned by this cautery everywhere.
and it is the form of the cauterization:
and that which is more moderate in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting on both sides, but the cutting should be well spaced to withstand the heat for a longer time. For when the extremities are too tense, they hold less heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the outer skin of the head, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment that one makes, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel the forehead with trembling as if from fever; and the eyes are tender and moist so that the hair of the eyelids are fallen, and the eyelids are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, thus there is need for this treatment. And the ancients called it "confused cure", and it is that you make for the patient who has this disease to let the hairs grow on the forehead, then make three even cuts on the forehead according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "confused cure", and it is that you make for the patient who has this disease to let the hairs grow on the forehead, then make three even cuts on the forehead according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the cuts be as long as two fingers in the middle of the forehead going downwards almost to the nose, and the other two cuts are on either side of the eyelids, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on either side of the eyelids;
and withdraw your hand from the continuity of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers at the crosswise joints;
and have prepared a piece of sponge and much of cloth to wipe the blood, then cut the spitonicle sharp with two parts where the form is;
from the incision that is above the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the heart which is between the two fissures to all the surface which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract this spitonicle. if you cut in the first fissure the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is soft, not sharp, and this is its form;
And put the cauterized part cutting towards the flesh near the heart, and let the cauterized part touch towards the bone, and let it go as far as it comes to the middle seam.
And cut off the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to what opens from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle seam up to the other side;
and then extract equally from the blood, and press the limb for the blood taken;
then put in each seam a piece of old cotton, and put on wet dressings with wine and oil and vinegar, and guard against abscesses that do not come;
and on the third day untie the linen, and apply a great plaster of hot water, then the treatment of wounds with basilicon oil, and other treatments that one cures wounds, until it is healed.
When there is an acute and painful inflammation of the eyes, and you see them become small and weak, and the sight is dim, and the eyelids are burned; and the hair falls out, and the head is deeply painful, and the patient is in agony; then it is known by these accidents that these humors and this catharrh do not come from many veins, and the treatment of the disease which it is, thus it is this.
And you instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one two fingers wide. And let the incision be from the left temple to the right temple, and it should be just to the bone; and dislodge your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain;
and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then probe between the two lips of the wound and put in a lot of cotton, and bind with linen; then apply moist dressings soaked in wine and oil, and beware of a hot abscess;
when it is bony, it is necessary that you rub the bone as long as flesh begins to grow, then treat with caustic things, which cause to fill with flesh.
In a similar way: take two parts of flowers of centaury, and four parts of wormwood, and make into a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to fill with flesh throughout.
of the hardness of hearing
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: Oats, or beasts, or stones of mines or similar things such as iron. or seeds, like jasper, fava beans, peas; or flowing things such as aqua and oils and similar things.
When there is a stone in the ear or another kind of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, apply a poultice of oil of violets or oil of cypress, then attempt to extract it. and make the person sneeze from conditioners, and stop up their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and stretch the ear upwards.
Many times a discharge comes out through this treatment;
and if it does not come out by itself, then one must perform a subtle extraction with pincers, for that is the method.
If it comes out by itself with the pincers, it's good;
if not, then one must perform an extraction with small nippers subtly and carefully;
and if it does not come out by that, then make a thread of silver and push the head of the thread through the hole of the ear strongly, and squeeze what is around the thread of wax so that the veins cannot enter with the thread; then pull it out strongly, for many times it comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue of that and take the instrument, and put some tool which has a point for that purpose, and put a little cotton around; Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull strongly.
And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear as well as the abscess is hot and swollen, and spasm;
and the manner of the incision is that you first let blood from the patient's head, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or dependent flesh; and let the incision be as wide as a reed, until you reach the stone, then extract the bone according to your power, and suck hastily with your mouth;
and heal it until it is healthy.
And if it's a grain that is embedded and swollen, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot come out, then apply the spatula needle subtly according to this form: and administer an incision on that grain.
But do not do it when you think that the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then extract it with subtle pinces and with sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
In the case then that there is a discharge in the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses ear washers first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let them be applied on that same ear where the discharge is. If it comes out by itself, it's good.
If this is not so, then take many stones according to the length of your hand and fingers and toes, and heat them a little by fire; and put the patient's finger in one of his ears, and rub it with one of his feet from the other side, and make friction with another foot on the foot that is by the ear; and do not stop rubbing foot against foot until the disease has gone entirely away, and thus the health will be entirely restored;
and if you see it, then take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and hold the other end in the fire until the hottest part of the reed is burnt;
then do the same thing with other reeds until the disease has entirely gone, as we have said in the aforementioned place.
In the extraction of a beast, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section;
but if it is of large size so that one can feel it, then administer the extraction of splinters; and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you perform the treatment as we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations, and the treatment is not profitable, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if there appear no worms, treat them as subtle splinters, and if they do not appear, take the chain from which it is made:
And let it be narrow at the top and wide at the bottom. And put the thinnest part in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck strongly on the chain; do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, then anoint with cotton swab as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not protrude forth as we have said, then administer distillations that the old ones have experienced in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations;
and if you instill your oils and your medicines in the ear with all this instrument, of which this is the form as you see: And be it of silver or of copper, insert through the small opening, and above, holes to instill;
and to press within the instillation, the copper instrument well made for this purpose, and if you see take the stopper and envelop it with cotton around the pointed end; then put your oil or your juice, and that which you see of your medicines in the cane, and let the cane be in the ear;
Then thrust your finger inside the nostril of the entire cotone, and press your hand strongly so that the oil is distilled or separated from the ear; and let the patient feel inside, and let the distillations be warmed by fire in the same way that one distills into the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the stopping up of the ears
No child is born who does not have a passage in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men through the stopping up of a wound, or of a flesh born inside the ear, and these stoppings sometimes come from deep within the ear, so that one cannot see it;
and sometimes it happens that the passage is blocked, and one sees it very well.
That which comes from the depths, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many conditions, and in that which one sees, it is necessary to put the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside: if you see the opilation apparent, if the work has all this spatula of which is its form:
And let it be sharp and cutting at the front and back, completely flat, so that it does not harm the ear;
if the opilation is from a cartilage or body of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, until that cartilage is completely removed.
And if the opilation is deep within the ear, then take a subtle rasp lightly and heat it a little by the fire, then put it in the body of the ear.
If you feel the obstruction for which the patient feels grievous pain in the ear, probe lightly, and beware that you do not injure the nerves of the ear;
then put in the ear a tent made according to the width of the perforation, and the stopper in Egyptian ointment. Do this on no day unless the wound is suppurated, or take a tent and the stopper in rose water, and powder with vitriol bruised;
and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you pull out the tent and put in another moistened tent made of cerate which is made from rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is reduced; then cure it until it is healed.
And if a flow of blood comes, if necessary, plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that reduce the flow of blood which are treated with distillations.
It is a remedy that comes from papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, so you must stretch them with tweezers and pinchers, and take the head of a spatula of its roots; then put on the wound vitriol ointment.
And if it is without a dressing, then the cauterization by a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth more;
and many times repair, when anything falls from its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then their roots are burned and do not regrow.
of the knee Many times come in papers of the eyes a thing that seems like a knee in its shape and hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "grandine", and it is an assembly of gross moisture in the upper and lower paper; The works are such:
The works are such: it seems to change from one side to the other, and it is an easy thing to know;
then touches the dolor with the fingers, then lightly scrapes off each part, then takes it with pincers, and cuts it.
if you cannot cut it without piercing a little the skin, do not grievously harm the patient;
and if the wound is large, then assemble it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed;
and if it is small, do not apply pressure to it, for the organs will restore it at once and join with flesh.
And if the growth hangs down inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the skin, and stretch the growth with pincers, and cut and press it from one side to the other;
and if the plaster is removed by cutting, it does not cause any harm;
and when the stone is cut, if you put a salt water ointment on it, and treat the place that has excess discharge until the patient is healthy.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is discharged in excess on the upper eyelids, and this happens more to children than to old people, and causes them much harm to their eyes, and it brings them catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears hasten to their eyes;
and because of this they often lie on their faces, and sleep on them, and their eyelids above their eyebrows become moist with the inflammation and the appearance is covered by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the limb with your fingers and feel the excretion between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in your hands;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a dressing in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the discharge of each part, then put it on him; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the discharge is gathered within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture a spatula making a cut of such width, and not larger than the wound that one makes on the vein;
and make the skin deep enough until you reach the discharge; and in many instances discharge comes from the cut, in the form of a piece of white fatty matter.
Remove then the dressing by pulling out a piece of cloth gently between your two fingers from the top, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is loose;
and beware that you do not put in the wound, that you do not touch the spatula to the eye, that you do not blister it.
And if the eschar does not open at the beginning of the wound, then slightly enlarge the wound a little until it opens;
then remove it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and in water, and put on the wound, and bind with bandages.
And if there are some men who break the seal and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then treat him until he is healthy.
And if there comes to the wound a hot abscess, then treat it with soothing plasters until he is healthy.
the hairs of the papers When in the papers hairs grow joined to other than their nature, and are inflamed, if they harm the eyes, and bring various kinds of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albugine, so that it is a cause of destruction of the eyes;
and the cure is according to four methods: or by cautery with assembled fire, or by sharp medicine according to what is before the chapter of cautery, and is made either by incision and stitching or by cauterizations, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your left, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
if it is converted, it is good; if not, then one puts a needle to all the thread underneath; and let it be the margin of the parchment where the hairs grow among these hairs, and pull the thread to the top across all the parchment, and turn it to the raspers;
then make on the part below the parchment, below the hairs adjusted, all the spatula copying, from the large scissor up to the small;
then extract the thread, and put below the parchment a small piece of cotton and of cloth, then draw on the parchment a figure of ink, such as the leaf of mint, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the parchment which is divided into pieces.
And if it happens that one must take a large quantity of the parchment according to that which the parchment is softened;
then make on all the spatula along the two lines that you have drawn, starting from the large scissor to the small; and let it be one of the natural fissures near the hairs in the thickness of a root, then cut the onion on one of the two angles of the heart, then scratch everything;
then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle and all thread of subtle wool, and suck the blood, and make dry the superfluity of threads on the two eyebrows with any glueing things, if you want to do this;
and if not, if there is no cure, then leave the stitch and the threads in place until three or four days;
then cure the wound without a stitch of dry and constricting things, for the skin relives suddenly with the closure of it, but the stitch is bad (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear; and if in another way:
and if in another way: and it is that you show the paper of a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three ounces of mixture according to the form which is here:
then cut that which overcomes the small equally according to the form which is here:
And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put another thread from the large arm, and the second thread from the small one, and join between your two hands the threads equally;
then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have described, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to a cutting, thus one calms it with chalk and similar soothing applications;
and sometimes it happens that the hair of the skin is converted:
if it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision;
but the stitching in one and in the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the skin and the seam within according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two subtle threads as long as the skin and the width of the spatula is; and cut at the two heads of the two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly on what overcomes the skin of the eye, and strain the two wounds of the two parts forcibly; and let it be for a few days, and the skin that is constricted will become numb and brittle and will decay, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, if the wound has with it some strengths, then heal it until it is healthy;
and when the wound is sucked, and if the skin is lifted, and the hairs will not prick anymore;
and it is the form of the two calves that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width;
the work is such that you take a fine needle, and put in it a thread of soft and fine silk; then assemble the heads and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm of length;
then put in order on the flesh another subtle thread of silk quickly, and tie the head of the two threads;
Then put the patient's head in a warm poultice;
and let it be loose under the sun so that the work is declared, for it is a subtle and minor work, then insert the needle to the entire length in the root of the hair adjacent to it, and make it pierce the skin gently until you draw it out from above the natural hair;
then pull out the hair up to the flesh, and put into the flesh that same hair, if there is one or two or three or several;
then remove your hand so that the hairs grow out of all the flesh in the skin with the natural hair.
And if the flesh is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will pull the flesh from beneath all the thread that you have ordained for it, until the flesh grows out from the hole and so that you see it by the vision of the eye;
Then thread the gut and the cord, and close the eye and let it be for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and the flesh grows.
and if the hairs are short, accompany them with a long hair from the natural eyebrows, and let it be joined with that which you left, until it is elongated and then lift it.
from the decay of the eye When this disease which is called "ulceration" or decay comes to the eye, it does so in two ways:
one is natural, and the other unnatural.
And it comes from a sudden wound, or a cut, or a burn, and similar things.
And the manner of the work is that you split the seam, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tendons of linen, and leave them there until they are healed;
and it is not suitable that you use in the treatment of those things that are dry and constricted. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first one;
but it is to open things that soften, such as figwort; and the juice of ague or alte and seed of flax be cooked, and anointments of hyacinth melted in one of the oils, and it wraps a bandage, and cures this.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care that it not become dirty according to the form it was in before;
and these are the treatments that we have said are not useful for this disease, that it does not return to its form as it was before.
This disease which is dislocated, truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from a wound and from a cut and from cauterization and from similar things;
and the way of the work in this case is that you take a needle, on which there is double thread, and the needle in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the thread comes out at both sides of the flesh;
then sew the flesh over the needle, and cut it with a spatula wide. And if the shape of the wound returns to what it should be, it's good;
if not, then take a rasp and put it in the cut, and turn the flesh, and make two cuts on either side of the wound;
and let the head of the two fractures of the two edges of the incision that you have cut be made into an angle such that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has no "I griesche
then sew on that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are adjusted by, from what follows the wound, then join the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of linen.
then apply the treatment for what we have said about softening medicines, and of tents, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a fracture or from a surgical cut or from a cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a straightforward incision beneath the hairs of the skin, and according to what is presented before. then separate between the two lips of a wound, as I have said;
then separate between the two lips of a wound, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare everything so that they can make the figure return to its natural form;
and the same for the patients, according to what is needed for work and instruments in many different arrangements.
When this adhesion has hands in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the egg, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up;
and stretch it as pinching, until you cut what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patients cannot suffer that the too sharp spatula does not injure the eye;
and let your incision be such that you lightly scrape away the assembled tissue, so that the skin regrows according to its natural form;
and it is healthy for all the assembled tissues, and sometimes they form in the bitter oil, and the liver of sweet bile, and of gall;
then put between the skin and the oil a layer of linen, and put on the oil wet wool in abundance of egg; and after the third day, apply sweet gall and other soothing things until it is healed.
It is known that the anvil is according to two manners: one is nervous and similar to a hard skin, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to a white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and cuts the skin with pincers, it cannot feel;
and one and the other symptom worsens towards the large artery, and increases little by little until it hinders the whole view and the whole light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head on your lap, then opens their eyes; and raises the skin with your hand, then threads the needle to the small double clamps, and tightens it above; then takes a needle, and puts the hair of a horse, or of a cow, or of an ox, and a strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and fixes it in the clamp, and pierces it with the whole needle, and ties the clamp with a thread and tightens it above, and scrapes all the hair from the side of the clamp which bears the prune and the thread to the hair just at the head, then cuts the remaining part in the root of the artery with a subtle spatula and small forces, and lets the natural flesh of the artery, so that by the incision does not come the body of the blood acrimoniously;
and sometimes the nail sticks to the anvil solely, and to the thread, as we have said; then the surgeon has all the spatula in the soft part from which is the form:
And beware that the spatula does not touch the fleshy tissue and tear it, and that the needle is not perforated;
and after the incision put in the eye a little of powdered selv or ceruse, and made from litharge, and let it stay there until the next day; then treat what is necessary for him until he is healthy.
And if the nail is not sensitive, and you cannot push in the needle, and the unctions cannot enter, often this type of nail is treated with medicines;
and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, if it opens the eye of the patient, and take the spatula gently a little sharp according to this form: And rub the sore gently, and if you see that it diminishes at all and the reason presses, then distill from your mouth into the little bowl made of litargire and take the red collir and apply the plaster to the oil until the next day;
If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then anoint it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healthy, then resume the work as before, until it is healthy.
then resume the other work according to this same work, as long as it is all bone.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm troubles the oil by great damage, then sop it with the onion, and cut off a part and not all, so that no harm comes from the arm;
Then distill in the oil of red collier which is made from litharge.
In the eyes of some men there grows a red flesh, and it covers the tonsil and holds against the pillars and turns to the mouth in decay, and looks like a rose of baluster.
and the work is such that the patient puts his head in a healthy position, then opens the eyes, and collects all that flesh with sharp instruments suited to it, and supports it with force;
then cut the first flesh, and go cutting to the raw edge right up to the end, and be careful that you do not touch the oil to the work;
and let the incision be with a spatula-like instrument that we have mentioned in the incision of the ankle and with small forces from which one takes the bone, as the form shows after this chapter where it is demonstrated;
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of distilled broom or you distill red collier and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the wound cotton with vinegar, so that it is secured from hot abscess;
and if it remains nothing, and the blood without heat overcomes it, and you doubt hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that appease the hot abscess;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as the flesh is adjusted in the oil by this similarity.
But nonetheless it is necessary that you remove the treatment of each weak oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work with iron;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
There are red veins that are hidden under the eye, and take away its function and weaken the eye entirely.
Examine first whether the eye is in its proper place, is strong, and has no other disease besides the cataract; then bind it in a similar manner:
instruct the patient to put his head on your left side, then press those veins all along the shoulder according to his wisdom, and let the shoulders be subtle and double in this form:
And let there be two shoulders by degrees on the body in this form:
then bind the strong veins subtly, and let the blood go out hour after hour, until you see the veins of the eye move again;
and beware that you do not prick the eye at the points of the spitaminals, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not puncture those veins;
and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collirium to corrupt what remains of the cataract.
And if you do not have the power to collect all that in one hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it stay for some hours until the pain is eased and is assured of warm abscess, then start again according to this method which is described before until it is healed;
and these are the forms of the remedies:
The physicians call "arissati" fistula:
when you treat it with cautery and hot burning medicine according to what I said before, and it is not healed, then a wick is put in it so that you cut into the abscess where it should be drained, and pull out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then you scrape away all the instrument of which this form is made;
and it is called "aspera caput", and let it be made into a rough head, and let it be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the bone of the corrupted flesh, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is scraped;
and do this sometimes, then restore the limb with excitative medicines.
if the limbs are swollen, and there is a tumor, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not suppurate and is not an abscess, and no bad accident comes, know that he is healthy;
if this is not so, then there is another technique for bringing the fistula to the outer opening of the kidney according to this method: and it is that you discover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is discovered then take the forest according to this method, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the tube be narrowed down to the head as you see here:
then put it on the bone of the arm, and stretch out your hand from the hole a little, then turn all the instrument as much as it penetrates the bone and the patient feels by that which comes in if he puts his hand on his kidney;
and then restore the limb with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh becomes calloused and hardens the limbs, so it goes to the matter at the kidney; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open and wide everywhere, and there comes no disturbance to the kidney, or narrowing, then it is necessary that you bind the patient;
then apply the poultice, then apply ventouses or apply iron to cauterize for sucking, then apply on the eye a plaster made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then hold the eye, and fill it with bandages and dressings;
and the manner of the dressings is that you take dressings soft enough, and fold each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs;
Then strain by means of a hard bandage above, and restart the veins to suck without piercing.
Then let out the veins and constrain the eye by day and night, and if the swellings become soft, it is necessary that you strain them much;
Then let out the swelling after the day and night, and if you see the eye getting better, it is good;
If it is not so; If you restart the plaster and the dressings and the swelling and the veins until they are healthy.
Due to tearing of the web of the eyelid When tears come in the web of the eyelid, then it opens, and comes out of the skin like a grain of resin, and is horrible to see;
Then if you want to cover the tear, the work is such that you put a needle at the root of the affected part just above the skin, then put another needle where it has the double thread of the part of the armchair; and make them pierce, and let the first needle according to the disposition;
then cut the thread of double fiber and tie one part of the thread around, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and put on the moist wool in abundance of oil;
and let it be until the threads cling with the thread, then treat the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and often the wound is restrained by the thread each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes show great appearance, thus he pierces at the subtle spatula which comes from the depth of the oil, and rubs the swollen humidity and descends the eye, and enters inside immediately;
then remove it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not outside of the one who has gathered in the eye, resembling descending pus, and it is not pus;
and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight siege, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it as much as you see the bulge coming up to your eyes; then let it be fixed, and not hanging down, and the light disordered, and the patient sees things as they should be;
and if it does not hang down below, know that it is pus, and the falling of the bulge is not prepared as we have said.
make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make it on the corner of the web with a little push by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the web and the corner, as long as the bulge is there;
and when it is dislocated, if it drips into the oily warm honey mixed with onion or fennel, which is boiled and mixed, then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healthy.
of the sharpness of the oil We have seen the similarities of the sharp things in the division, and that which is necessary to pierce; if one works according to health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light by the sun, and apply the healthy oil and rub very strongly;
then put the cloth of the oil in your left hand if his eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if his eyes are on the right;
then take in your right hand, if his eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if his eyes are on the right;
Then put the point of the instrument inside the crown by the thickness of a reed in that white part of the eye at the side of the lesser armier, then push the instrument which is called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand as long as it penetrates into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing;
and it is necessary that the measurement of the path of the almagda be at the depth of the measurement of the space which is from the prunele to the end of the blackness; and it is the crown of the eye;
if you see the bone in that papery thing through the clarity of the corneal web, then put the instrument as far as where the vein is, then press down one path after another.
if the vein descends now, then the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest, and if the pain returns through the second path, put the staff with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not move, gently extract it by turning your hand little by little;
and then put on the pain a little of gum seed, and apply to that place the oil inside. Then put by means of the oil, cotton soaked in rose oil and an abundance of vinegar, and apply with healthy oil.
We, and those who are of our condition, put on the common broth with an abundance of vinegar.
And if the gum cannot enter through the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is this:
And then pierce the conjunctive gently, and do not go too deep, but make the subtle place, then apply the ointment, as we have said;
and upon completion of the work prepare the patient for sleep, having him sleep on his back in a dark place;
and let him avoid all movements, and take light meals, and not turn his head to the right or left, and let him be placed according to his disposition until the third day;
then untie him in the same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see certain things, and then put him back to bed until the seventh day;
and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you alleviate this, because the pain mounts quickly;
Abscesses of the intestines come, that you untie the oil before the seventh hour, and prepare what cures the abscess;
and when it is appeased, then untie the vein and put on his face a golden ointment to cover any hour, and let him be at that time in the dark house.
And then goes out of the house little by little, and converts into his clothes;
and knows that no disciples should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from the Iraqi, who told us that in their country they made a remedy with perceived alum, which draws out the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any of it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of almagra, because those who do not know them, see them.
and are of arsenic properly: And are the head of the elements of this same subtlety, and the remainder in 3 sharp angles.
Sometimes thick hard skins are born on the nails, from which there are some that resemble scorpions with many feet;
and if it has such thick skin with an encrusted crust of dark color, and a thin skin of pale color. In this case then of these thick skins which is thin and not encrusted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;
In this case then of these thick skins which is thin and not encrusted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and cut the ligament at those thick skins, and pull them strongly; Then consider that you must support the subtle sharp point of the spatula on one side, as long as you know that the instrument is entirely bony.
And if anything remains that cannot be covered, then open it to all the subtle and lightweight instruments, so that nothing remains; and let it heal without suppression, or a hot abscess, if you drain it as is necessary;
and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize the wound as much as the blood is stagnant and all the flesh is hardened, then anoint with oil or vinegar and sharp wine. If the wounds open, and discharge comes to the palate, know that it is a sign of health;
and if discharge does not pass as it should, know that there is dead flesh in the hollow bone, because the instruments do not come to cut through;
Then it is necessary that you put on a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and let it be known by us, and have between each knot a space of two fingers or less; and put the patient's head on the thread in his nostril to smell it, and pull it in pulling so that it comes through the nostril inside the mouth;
and many times they do this to the child as a trick, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
then hold the end which comes through the nostril in one hand, and the other end which comes through the mouth in the other hand, and pull one after the other being careful of us who are on the thread;
Do it as long as you know that the knots have pressed on that flesh, then pull the threads, suck the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the nostrils as before;
Make this for three days or more, as long as the ligaments corrode all that remains of flesh;
and then put on a plaster of pounded leaves for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for dry medicines, then use them;
and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which one distills the oils and the medicines;
And let it be of silver or of brass, similar to a covered lamp, like a chain, and the conductor thus;
and if you see, then make a closed chain, and let the instruments be flat to purge the head;
and have a handle at the top to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
of the flesh on the nose
Many times a growth appears on the head near the nose, a disease which is called "telul", and grows and increases greatly, until it is a visible thing to behold;
and for this reason it is necessary that you cut at the beginning, and remove all dead tissue, then apply the cautery or the burning medicine;
and if it is necessary to cauterize so that it becomes large, take heed if it is hard, of dark color, of little sensation:
if you do not touch it with iron, for that is an infected abscess, because when one cuts into it, great evil comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that one can cut into it, then warn the patient and cut with caution, and treat the area with drying and constricting remedies.
Be aware that when a flow of discharge comes from one of these wounded cartilages, it benefits little, except for some men.
It is necessary then when it happens to anyone, if one examines whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then joins the two lips of a wound to a seam, then cures it until it is healed;
and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you cauterize all the parts of the wound until they heal, then assemble the two lips into a seam, and constrict it, and powder with powder of blood of dragon, and incense bruised; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of Paris or another plaster that sticks, and let it be until it adheres by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healed;
The method of the wound closure is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the closure of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
of the abscesses of the lips
To hands men have we within the lips an aposteme hard, similar to grains of seeds, and smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you pierce the lips, and split into each knot, and take it with pincers and cut in each part;
then put in the brain after the incision of vitriol broth, until the blood is stanched;
and then apply the liver of arsenic, and treat the brain with dry things until it be healed.
Many times there grows on the gums a fleshy growth joined, which the old call "albulus";
if it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let flow the pus or the blood;
then put on the limb a vitriolic broth, or other powders that are restrictive and drying;
and if the wound reopens after the incision, and often happens, so that a second time it scabs over, and is cauterized: if it does not reopen after the cautery;
Sometimes they gather at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and worm-eaten, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth is stinking;
if it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and you take the teeth or the scabs appearing, until nothing remains; and thus make from the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and the other stains, as long as they are removed;
and if one removes that which is in the first layer, it's good; if not, then start again on the second day and the third, until you have everything resolved;
and know that the tooth has need of various shapes of instruments to scrape, according to what the work demands, because the roots that one scrapes from the teeth have other forms than those that one scrapes between the teeth; and let these forms and others be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat a tooth for its pain that you delay as long as you can, because one should not do harm; for it's a very noble substance, thus one has no excuse for damaging it.
Then when the patient is constrained by a pulling instrument, it is necessary that you are certain of the teeth that are causing pain. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and causes pulling of the bad tooth; and yet the pain does not depart from that place, as long as the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already seen it happen to these wise men;
and when you are well certain of the tooth that is causing pain, it is necessary that you scratch around the tooth with all a strong spatulum to guard the gum on all sides;
then put your fingers or subtle pincers at the first poke and poke, until it is well loosened, then firmly grip the pincers; and let the head of the patient be in your healthy hand between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part, and move it as you have done previously.
And if the tooth is decayed and rotten, then it is necessary to fill it with cloths, where the gaps are. and if you extract it subtly with pincers, so that it does not break while extracting;
and it is necessary to be very careful in working around the gum to avoid dislodging the tooth.
And it is good to warn that you should not break it, and leave a part behind, and cause the patient, by the wickedness of the root, greater pain than the first.
And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeons, who through their hastiness and hardness sometimes break the instrument, and do not heed what we have stated;
but they come sometimes from the questioning of that great sickness for the roots that remain there, or from the cartilage that it breaks, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is extracted, then wash the place with wine or vinegar and soap;
and if an effusion of blood comes, which often happens, then fill the place with a mixture of vitriol and broth;
and if that is not enough, then cauterize it;
The shape of the instruments, for which one removes the teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
and these are the forms: And they should be of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and should be made of well-finished iron, and should have teeth to hold the grip.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the socket, it is necessary that you put on the spot a moist cotton cloth for one or two hours, until the gums are softened, then you extract the teeth which are called "algefri", because of the pain.
and they are made dense like a file and this is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these instruments, it is necessary that you discover the flesh entirely around the root, and you put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a pelican, because of this shape:
And let it be strong and large so that it does not break the tooth, and if the root jumps out by itself, it is good;
if it does not, then you aid with all the instruments, of which the shapes come hereafter:
And if one aids oneself with this instrument which has two arms, from which its form is: and other instruments that are in front for the purpose of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, from which its form is:
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many tooth-instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned;
and the wise masters find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach the use of an instrument due to the diversity of ills and if it breaks or shatters the cartilage or other bones, or if it decays, then one seeks the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and aids oneself with gestures, from which its form is:
And let them be thick and well-held to hold the bone, so it does not shatter, but can be held and extracted;
and then restore the limb with suitable medicines for that, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, thus the remedy is for all this instrument:
When the teeth appear not in accordance with the natural body, and their form is ugly, and especially in women, it happens that you know if the teeth are newborn after the tooth, and not in the right place, and one cannot chew or file them:
then the rasping tool; and if it is rough with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is thus, and resembles a small beak, and let it be of sharpened iron at the end:
And cut a little and a little with the forceps in the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then the file of one part files as its form is:
and it is like the file with which one makes the needles;
and in filing the tooth little by little and lightly with gentle touches, so that it does not move until it is steady;
then the surface at the end of any roughness, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, then you must file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When the front tooth aches, either from percussion or from cold, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you try to treat them with astringent medicines, but that is not effective;
then you must hold it with a thread of gold, because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold does not change;
and let the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth;
and if you want to thread the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the thread between the diseased teeth, if there is one or several, until you come wisely just to the other healthy tooth; then bring the covering close to the part where you started, and pull your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move at all;
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the ends of the thread to one knot, and gather them, and pass them behind the healthy tooth, and put it so that it does not bite the tongue;
and then leave it tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the thread breaks, then constrain it with another thread;
If it remains and serves thus all its tension, and it is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the upper teeth and the lower teeth, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said;
and let no one interfere who is not wise and skilled, and sometimes makes the form of a tooth from the bone of a cow, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and holds it as we have said, and remains and serves thus for long tension.
Sometimes there is a ligament that comes from the teeth to the tongue by nature, which one is born with; or from an accidental wound under the palate;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your teeth, and lift the tongue;
Then cut the nervous vein broadly, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if it has hardness or swelling, and it is a sudden wound, then anoint the unguent and cut broadly that which holds.
and beware that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is exposed;
and when you have done, raise the leg of water of hot or cold, then put under the tongue a piece of linen;
and bind the patient every night, so that the legs cannot swell.
And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the leg vitriol broth; and if the blood does not stop, then cauterize it with a gentle cautery, which is good for that; then treat with another treatment until it is healthy,
and if you see a black or dark colored fistula, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer;
and if it declines to the bladder, and there is moisture, then he throws the stone, and makes a subtle spatula, and delivers from one side and the other; and if his blood fails in your work, then put on a warm broth as long as it is strained, then return to your work until you have treated everything thoroughly;
then lift the limb from the axle and from the seat, and treat other treatments until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat A tumor sometimes comes inside the throat called "godath", and we properly call them the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the section, and they are not healthy, take heed:
If it is a hard abscess with little sensation and of dark color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and its root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for fear of the evacuation of blood; but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will cut it, where it would break by itself;
and if it is of white color and rounded, and its root is subtle, prepare the instrument for cutting, but first check if the abscess is warm and at rest.
Then make the patient sit in the sun, and his hands be on your lap, and open his mouth and hold his tongue between your hands, and press it down to the bottom of the instrument, according to its shape;
and let it be of silver or subtle copper, as thin as a knife;
When you press the tongue against this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the nail and insert it in the handle, and pull it forcibly upwards more than you can;
and pull something from the tiles with it, then fit it to the instrument, of which this is the form, that seems like a strong force; and all of it is curved, and one part to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel;
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then fit it to the tenailles, of which this is the form: And let it be sharp on one side, and named on the other;
and when you have fitted one of the handles, then fit the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and with warm and running, and if there is discharge of blood, then gargle the patient, or cooked pomades of green plants, or fumigations of myrrh, and similar things, until the wound is stanched; Then leave the treatment until he is healthy;
and sometimes there appear in the throat other abscesses than the two tonsils, if one cuts them then thus like the two tonsils equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed inside her throat, that is to say the abscess of the uvula;
and it had already well pressed close the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she had stayed thus for one or two days.
And the abscess was already so grown that it had put out two roots through the two openings of the nose.
I hastened then as much as possible, and fixed in one of the angles, then pulled out the trachea, and with it a large portion of the throat.
Then I healed another part in the other wound of the nose, and I opened the mouth and I pressed the tongue;
After that I pierced the abscess, and I drained a part of it, and only a little blood came out; and then the throat of the woman was cleared, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time;
and the abscesses repeatedly grew back, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large;
then I inserted and cauterized it within the throat: it remained without growing;
and I departed from those parts, and knew not what God did after me.
of the eye
When the humors descend to the womb, and it is inflated and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is unevenly thick and round, then it is called "womb".
When it is purified as we have said in the section, and the purification does not benefit it, and you see that the ulcerous abscesses are appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it.
and the one that is round, gathered and not long; and it is bloody or of a dark brown color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger to the patient.
It is necessary, then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned before. Then fix the ankle in the hole, and pull it straight, and cut with the instrument of the two humors that I mentioned in the incision of the two arms.
And it is necessary that you do not remove more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut more, you will harm the voice and the speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two arms, and treat it until it is healthy.
And if the patient has fear to be cut, then it is necessary that you use caution in the cauterization of the sensitive area.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp pointed. And it is that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then presses the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and constricts it with a sharp pointed iron, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in the handling of this instrument, from which its shape is formed:
And let the head have a dressing where the medicine is applied, just like the handling of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the egg;
and the patient should be sitting on their side, so that the saliva and mucus run from their mouth with the medicine inside, so it does not go down the throat, and to the bladder;
then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the egg, for a quarter of an hour, until you see it becoming numb and the bites of the medicine are alleviated;
and if you see it, take cotton and envelop it in an instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton in the chain above, until the cotton adheres to the egg;
and do this often, as long as the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and apply a plaster after 4 days or 5.
And if you have the skill of reintroducing the cautery of the medicine, then reintroduce it, and after the cautery apply a dressing around the wound, made with cotton padded in butter, and cleanse that which is around the affected area;
and let it be treated with cold water, and let it be cured of gargling as long as it is healthy.
This treatment is safer than the incision, nor the cautery;
if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and aloe and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in one pot, and add oil, and make it boil;
and the pot should be well stuck in strong earth, and in the middle of the pot there is the instrument which is shaved in this manner: And it should be of silver or of lead, and one of the pieces should be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise to the eye through the vein, until the eye is deadened;
after the remedy is often repeated, until the eye is dry, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the emergence of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do it near to the declination of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, then take a reed and put in the end of it a piece of wool, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; For the claw of a bird does not touch the greasy steam on the mouth, and it is a good cure for salvation together.
Many times it rises to the throat bone or spine of fish, or similar things;
if it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sole of the foot with all the instrument, so that you see the thing moved;
and what does not appear and is thrown back into the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cut in the stomach; by chance the thing comes out through the vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of flax, or a root of lettuce, or a crust of dry bread; and tie to the sponge a thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, if it is rough, then you will rub forcibly;
and if it does not come from what we have said, take the instrument of plaster according to this form:
And let the curved instruments be at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head held high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all of it comes out, nor push the bone inside;
and it is good that the patient himself puts in the instrument, because he knows better or the thing is rough; if he puts it in downwards, or he pulls it forcibly with all the instrument equally, as long as it is downwards.
of the soreness of the throat
Certain times the soreness is treated with medicine, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when that does not benefit the patient, then examine the throat in the sunlight, then press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
And if you see the blood vessel, treat it with a small needle, or with subtle pincers that are suitable for this.
And if that is not effective, take a heated needle, and insert it in the patient's throat, then blow or expel the humors of the needle with hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient has a fever the whole day.
then take a full handful of cold water, and open the mouth, and throw it in such a way as to swallow, and move it with the hand often; and if you feel that the blood vessel is in the throat, then spit.
And if it does not gush out as we have said, then suffocate the patient with assafoetida, through the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the uva.
Do this many times, for it will pour out without delay.
And the method of the fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are hot coals, and it be covered with a perforated cloth, and in this pierced one put the head of the instrument;
then you give the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the nose;
and the nose will discharge now, and if it does not gush out, then repeat the fumigation many times;
and the patient suffers from thirst, and has bitter and salty things, and does not drink anything watery;
and therefore it is necessary that it be removed by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument for which one draws the blood, is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs for entering into the throat; and has resemblance to a hawk's beak, and it has roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot release;
Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what the memory recalls here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and in cutting;
and it is in two ways of which one is in its own likeness itself, and from what it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for the limbs where they are attached to the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come in the joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if it is an abscess that one should not pierce, as long as the belly is swollen according to its completion;
and if it is one of those that needs to be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are near the joints.
For when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets them be until they are purulent outside, then by chance the ligament and the nerve of the joint become corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member.
When the abscess is near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it becomes swollen, it will harm the principal member;
Where it is deep in the foundation, then pierce with anise so that it dies;
and it is necessary that you pierce the abscess with completed digestion, unless it is deep in the foundation, so that it does not putrefy within, and be cleaned inside, and a fistula comes; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the work of perforation of the abscess which dies according to completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of the fever, and the diminishing of the pain and of the redness, and the abatement and the soothing of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and it is necessary that you make the perforation or that which depends on the place of the abscess, and where it appears dead;
and let there be a perforation of the length of the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or the feet, or in the joints and in the kidneys and in the arteries, and in all equal places where there is no place of plethora. In those that swell, according to which member.
And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed by complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce before that, you will release the venom from him, and it is full of a lot of filth; and by chance they penetrate the lips and his innermost depths.
And if an abscess is pierced according to the width of the body, according to that which the member has need of.
And it is necessary that you make small incisions, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the head, and cauterize; when it has become numb like the fingers, and is numbnessed, then one must do it as one does for the buboes:
and if there are such that are cut into three angles, and if there are such that one cuts just like the edge of a knife, just like abscesses of the entrails;
and if there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cauterizations.
Those that have no head, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, not to drain all the pus at once, but to drain a part of it; then stop the abscess just short of the other eye, then touch some thing straight away; make that by many times of bone to bone, until the arm is entirely dislocated;
especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old and decrepit men. For the vein often bursts with the issue of the arm, so that by chance the patient dies, and you are not aware of it.
Avoid then this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is large, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat incision, then apply bandages of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put on each one a bandage so that they come one against the other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, then it is necessary that you fill it with a warm poultice or with a dressing of flax or linen threads moistened.
then anoint the bone, and treat the joint until it is healthy.
And if there is a flow of blood in your work, apply a cold and easy bandage, and moisten the cloth, and put it on the wound flowing many times.
And if the flow of blood persists, apply a treatment and cure, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book on the wounds, and if it is in the time of winter, and the wound or abscess is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on tents and moist cloths soaked in wine and hot oil;
and if it is in this state, and the limbs are fleshy, then you must apply moist dressings in water and in oil, or in wine and in cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
and then open the abscess and the cyst and treat it, as it is necessary, until it becomes healthy.
And this is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses:
I have already told you how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and see it in this chapter.
Where small abscesses come from the head, and are types of tumors that are in the thighs, as well as the joint of a knee, and many have similar characteristics.
There is fat and such things where there is moisture, like in pouces;
and if there are those that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no point of doubt, then one should not do the opposite.
And the work of the tailor is such that you examine all the instrument called "intermissive", from which its form comes afterwards, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then they make it with two pieces of wood.
And when the moisture is evacuated, then one scrapes without leaving anything the skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing;
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, with vinegar and with oil, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who run will be those who remain from nothing.
And then touch the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain a single knot.
Then treat the wound of the shoulder joint with suitable remedies, until it is healthy.
And if the abscesses have a fatty tumor, cut according to this form, from the length; and cut your scalpels, and scrape all around, and put all your treatment of drawing on the coat where it lies;
and if the artery is made contrary, do what I have told you afterwards.
And thus do with the abscess if it is pierced, and of cutting and of curing as I have told you.
And cut on the pierced abscess and the moist place, it is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if to some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and of these abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman;
and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had touched it with a needle, one would have made a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses coming on the head, there are those that appear on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening is such that it should be touched daily, depending on the condition, to allow the pus to flow out;
and the treatment as it is necessary.
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the shoulders, and in the corners, and sometimes appear in other parts of the body, and are numerous, and are joined one to another.
And each scrofula is properly inside its coat, as with the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scrofulas are many.
and the similarities of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
in that one then which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not harsh with the nerves of the neck nor in the artery nor in the channel, and is not deep;
it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scratch each part, and the two lips of the wound are like onions, if you are skilled, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and cut a little and a little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and it is not necessary for the spatula to be too sharp, so the hands are not tired, and do not go too far, so you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and that does not stop the bleeding, then put on the wound a vitriol broth, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound steady; and let it be until the abscess is soothed, and the wound is softened, and begins to decay.
And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, until you complete it;
then look at your hand to see if there remain small scrofula, and cut them and cure them.
And if there is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, it is not necessary that you cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by itself, without harming;
then fill the wound with cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then apply the treatment.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there was no remaining surplus due to the size of the scrofula. it is necessary that you understand to cut out the root of it, and pull out strongly, and sew as we have said.
it is necessary that you understand to cut out the root of it, and pull out strongly, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas that have a surplus, pierce them there where it appears most prominent;
and prick them thus as was said beforehand, in dependence, then I will apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts that which remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then apply a cure of ointment and anointing with charm, until it is healthy.
The ancient ones spoke and talked about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
For those who have a stammer, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cleaned; and one should not trust this remedy, because all the veins and the body of the patient with abscess are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaws.
When the disease is in the channel of the body, it is necessary to operate on the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we make a small incision of about three circles or four, a little cutting across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cutting of the skin, not in the cartilage;
and those veins are found at the section of the diaphragm such that there is no junction of flesh, and the vessels are long with anguish.
And if the muscles are swollen, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to its full length, then cuts the chest as far as it comes to the clavicle; and search for the blood vessels, if you see any thing, and then cut the tissue, as we have said;
and it is shown by the section of the flesh of the clavicle that the blood flows through the limb which is broken, and by the deficiency of the voice;
and leave the wound covered with a dressing.
And when the hour has passed from which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the chest, and sew it gently without the cartilage;
Then administer medicines that make hair grow, as long as it is healthy.
Do not give this treatment unless the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient appears to be near death, and the defect is in the spleen or the gut. Then cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death;
and because of this the old man commands to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or in four; And then he commands to sew the wound and to treat, until it is cured;
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the sinews of the lung from the breast;
and I was called by the healer, and I found him as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and it was good that it had not taken a course through the vein or the throat, and the veins were issuing out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed;
and did not have to the lady outside of where she had been rough in voice, and returned afterwards to her appearance;
because I said that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no pain.
This abscess is called "strangury of the throat", and is a large abscess in the colour of a jasmine, and is very common in women;
and it occurs in two ways: Natures, and accidents;
or natural does not have a point of intelligence.
And the accident is according to two manners, one of which is similar to a crisis for us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery. and it causes fear, and it is not suitable to perform cauterization except in cases where it is small, and one proves and examines throughout the entire interior. if you thrust it as with a blunt instrument, and do not penetrate to any vein, then you cut, just as one cuts the nails, and you treat all its substance, if there is a point to it; and search well everywhere, and cure it as it requires, until it is perfectly healthy.
There are many kinds of nails, which I will describe all the similarities;
and it happens that I see all the difference that is between swelling and discharge.
I say that discharge is heat and fever holding, as long as the abscess has passed, and it is accompanied by decay; then the fever and the heat are relieved.
With the swelling there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a thick fluid, which is its own special humor, and is according to the color of the body, and increases like a tumor, and becomes large;
and they are according to two similarities, either fat, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
It happens, when you come to the treatment of the swelling, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument that is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or chapter which follows.
And the method of inquiring about our abscesses is that you take the most moist part of the body that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, as long as you feel that the instruments have perforated the heart, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the intermuscular, and beware in that which will be the result.
If moisture runs short, which colour it has, thus make the dressing as I have said for other abscesses;
and after the intermuscular no moisture comes, know that it is fat, thus make a cross-shaped incision, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and guard the cartilage where it seems you should pull it out with the knot;
and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out in pieces until nothing remains.
For if it stays still, it comes back to us many times;
and if it stays a little while, and the blood does not gush out, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound, and put on soothing hot applications for abscesses, and treat with other treatments until it is healthy;
and if the wound is large, then sew the two lips of the wound, and treat with those things which induce scar formation.
and if the veins are beaten against or otherwise hastened and apply to it a mixture of vitriol, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to copper that which had been deposited from the new.
Behold here the forms of the entromissive instruments, and they are of three kinds: Big and soft and small;
and there are three kinds that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and they have three ways: big, soft, and small, for enclosing the abscesses of fistulas;
and are like the needles whose sources are cut, and are of copper citrin, or iron, or silver, and some are worth more which are yellow, and are more tested with black lead for enclosing the cores of fistulas;
and they are of three kinds: big, soft, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The shapes of the tumors are of many similarities, as you see here:
and if there are wounds that have two cervices of three manners thus;
and if there are wounds that have three cervices, and are thus of three manners;
and if there are wounds that have two cervices, and wounds with only one cervice, and are of three manners;
and all this is necessary in their body.
The head of these is made thus sharp, and of such that they do not cut more than from one side, from which one scrapes the nuts, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
and of these instruments are the scissors used in surgery, so that the patient does not feel at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and do not use more force than on the flesh of the nuts, such as thighs, and arms, and shoulders, and the like parts.
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to the fistula's scraper, in this form, to which one stains blood: and one puts it sometimes at the place that bleeds with abundance of veins, and arteries, and sometimes breaks according to this great form:
Sometimes the shoulders of certain men become swollen when their humors begin to be corrupted, so that they seem to be the shoulders of a woman;
and they become swollen and inflated, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form of this line from .b. to .g.: then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with warm medicinal tar, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the breast hangs low, and is swollen due to its size as it happens in women, then make two incisions above, through two similar fissures; because one should hold the other at the end of one and the other, so that the longest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line to the line. then scrape the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said concerning stitching and powders, and that which is necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the lack of blood, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive oil; and let it be until it reaches the marrow and the fat, then treat it until it is healthy.
These abscesses that appear under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofula, or it has knots, and if there is one that contains moisture.
Those which contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line B to line G: And when the whole boil that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with gentle ointment suitable for that which is healthy.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then do it as we have said in the incisions of scrofula, and if the wound is open, then apply cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin that is above it becomes swollen, often an abscess forms, and similarly it happens to the swollen vein with an abscess;
and if one knows thus that it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the strangeness;
and when it is due to the vein, then the feelings are of a feverish appearance;
and it is foolish to try to cure this abscess, and similarly when it is under the shoulders and arms and neck and in many other places, and it is very serious. It is necessary then to avoid the treatment with iron, and the one who is in charge must avoid it also, and for the one who has a swollen artery, a lancet is made through the skin from far away;
Then open the injury at the ankles, and carefully separate the artery from the tendons, until it is exposed;
Then push a needle through one of the veins, and make it pierce to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread on both sides, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then touch the limb that is between the two threads of an intermedium as long as the blood which comes out of it, and let the abscess be opened;
Then put in place the treatment that the wound requires, until the thread is pulled; Then treat what needs treatment, accordingly, until it is healthy;
and if the abscess is near the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can from the abscess with all the skin, then push the needle through the limb that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; After the abscess, as I have told you, or the ligament of one of the two parts at the two sides of the flesh;
and if you doubt that the thread will not come out, then you rethread another needle to all the thread below all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four places;
then cut the abscess as long as the superfluous tissue comes out, then cut the superfluous part of the heart and let remain what is tied;
then put on a moist cloth with wine and oil, then apply treatments of bandages and ointments until he is healthy.
Just like abscesses come to the artery and to the vein, abscesses come to the kidneys when they are injured, or from too great labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the joints and in the fingers and in all the limbs where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and in many cases it is without pain;
and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in depth of the body, but rather near the heart;
and it moves well in all directions, and does not go neither forward nor backward, neither up nor down, and that which is in the joints does not require to be cut with iron; by chance it produces contraction; and that which is on the head or on the forehead, makes the skin spitulous.
and that which is on the head or on the forehead, makes the skin spitulous. If the abscess is small, then hold it with tongs, and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, then suck it with the hook, and scratch it, then remove the bone and bring together the wound to the seam, and treat it until it is healed.
Sometimes it occurs in the belly and not in any other part of the body, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps.
and it has small and very large portions;
and I have seen a man who had two in his belly that were more similar to mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and were easily split, and they corrupted the moisture.
I cut them open and found in one eighteen ounces in weight, and in the other six, and the work of the incision is that you should examine if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the tumor is white and moist and has a subtle root; If the scab is large on the spatula, and it is in your presence, then there is a cauterization by fire.
If the scab is large on the spatula, and it is in your presence, then there is a cauterization by fire. For in the cutting often come very great outflows of blood, and if the wound is not treated, then hasten to cauterize;
and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the incision of the iron, take a well-made thread of flax, and tie the joint as we have said, and let it be two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to tighten the thread of flax as long as it covers the joint, and cuts through it without effort;
and if the roots are thick, fear to cover them entirely for the belly, but you can cover half well, then cauterize so it does not grow back;
then treat the wound, and beware that you do not cover the tissue which is of foul color and of poor sensation and of bad repair.
For there are hidden abscesses, and I will come to the treatment of abscesses after this.
When the navel is swollen If the appearance of the navel comes from a cauterized wound or a crack in the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the navels, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is visible, or from windiness;
and if it is from the rupture of the skin and from the discharge of the navel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various discharges. And if it is from the discharge of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses on the sides if they swell, and then subside, and by chance if they are obstructed, and increase greatly at the entrance of the bath and from strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it's a light thing, and it appears well when you press it with your hand, not constraining anything.
And if it is due to blood, it appears by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity. And if it is due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you consider its appearance by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or flatulence.
And if it is due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you consider its appearance by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or flatulence. It is necessary that you abandon the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the belly, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his breath, and be stretched out straight, then sign with ink all around the navel. Then instruct them to sit comfortably between your hands, then go inside the bed that you have assigned to the whole spine, then place the majority of the abscess on top of the whole large uncle. Then tie him inside with a strong thread, or a cord of strong twisted rope firmly, and let us have the tied member loosened.
Then open the majority of the abscess stretched on the member, and thrust your right index finger, and seek the intestine. If you find it taken by the member, then untie it, and thrust the intestine to the bottom of the belly.
and if you find the navel, then take it by the hip, and cut off the excess.
and if the artery or vein is made contrary, then go gently inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and thrust two forceps, and put the two needles inside what you have made in a cross that you make perforate.
Then strain the abscess in four places under the ankles, and if you see, remove the ankles, and let the limb alone as long as it purifies, and discharge the dead flesh by itself; or remove it when it becomes subtle and purified, then treat what is necessary, and discharge the abscess as we have said;
or remove it when it becomes subtle and purified, then treat what is necessary, and discharge the abscess as we have said; and strain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb with what is necessary, and sew the limb.
of cancer We have spoken in the section about the similarities of cancer, and how one should open with medicines, and how one should choose the treatment with iron;
and say that cancer grows in the marrow, and there is great difficulty in the treatment, and the ancients said that when there are cancers on the limb or where one can raise them like cancer which is in the breasts, and in the thigh, and in similar limbs, and it must all be removed when it is in the beginning;
no harm has ever been seen by me before;
And the work, when it is in the body or where one can hide it, as we have said, is that you should sometimes purge the patient of black bile;
then make him do bloodletting if he has shown fullness, then prepare the patient well in body to perform the work;
then cut your nails or calluses, and shave yourself completely, and remove all the bone on every side without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow freely, and press well the body with your hand or with anything, and if the flow of blood makes you feel pain from the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it as long as the blood is stanched; Then the treatment of another cure until he is healthy.
of dropsy. We have already spoken in the division about the symptoms of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each symptom, and the treatment that is made by medicines, and that which is treated with iron.
and one should not touch with iron in these two symptoms: namely, tympanites and hypochondria, for it is mortal things;
then when you apply medicine to this symptom of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, if consider that the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as a tumor and a solution of the stomach and similar things; If he does not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient with strong virtues, and he has no other illness except dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should operate: Lift the patient straight in your hands, and let the attendants press the belly with the elbow at the lowest part of the chest, then take the spatula spine according to this form: And let it be cut from two parts. to a point, and the tube should not be so inserted that it can come into the intestine when one puts it in, and it cannot be blocked;
then consider if the dropsy is turned towards the intestines: if necessary, you should cut into the arm three fingers from the elbow above the fist; and if the hydropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then let the incision be on the left side of the belly III fingers;
and if it's due to the spleen, then let it be on the right, and it is necessary that the patient urinate on the incision so the superfluous liquids do not flow into the weak body;
then pierce the skin with the instrument, and thrust it, and raise your hand to all the spatula between the skin and the underlying tissue as if scraping out the quantity of a fingernail or a small tumor;
then pierce the underlying tissue until the spatula comes to the empty space, and it is the seat of the pain, then pull it strongly, and thrust this instrument according to its shape: And it is similar to a thin silver thread, and is made of light copper or brass, and has at its end a small perforation; and on one side, a wound of three perforations; and two of another kind, and one of another;
and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers carve into the quill:
at the upper part is the handle, so that when the strikers come to the water, they now descend onto the instrument;
remove then the half or the third part, for if you remove more than it is necessary at that time, by chance the patient may die from the release of his vital spirit in the arm, or he may become paralyzed, or he may approach death;
but remove according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses;
Then bring the instrument and hold the needle, and it is held now by the cord that stops up the perforation which is on the surface, of which I have spoken, that you should pierce in this manner;
Then insert the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take from the needle a small quantity;
Do it on the same day, and keep yourself from touching him too much as long as there remains only a little bit of blood.
And if you doubt the patient, and you let much blood, so that the sore becomes swollen or rough, and by excessive sweating or bath and in the sun, and it turns black; and treat with desiccative medicines until it be healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of blood, as I have said before.
Sometimes infants are born who do not have a hole in the rod, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
If it happens that he does not have to pierce all the very subtle spatula according to this form:
Then put the subtle tube of a feather into the hole, and tie it with thread, and hold it for three or four hours, and when he wants to urinate, let the tube be removed, and let him urinate, and then put it back;
and by chance there is no harm, for the urine that comes forth does not allow it to be closed.
For he whose hole is small, there is a medicine of the thread of a feather, as we have said, which will enlarge it.
Those who do not have the hole in their place are called blind, for there are none born who have the hole at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before they lift their rod up high; and they cannot put a splint on it because the material cannot come close to the marrow, and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patients lie on their back, put the head of the rod and the handle as the width of a quill, if the perforation is in the middle, as it is necessary;
and beware of the effusion of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then stop the flow of what flows blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
the pustules of the rod Many times cysts come to the rod, and it is an appearance of flesh wound.
and there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
if necessary, you should take them with the sharp onion, and cut and clean all, then put on cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; Then cure the joint with diafinicon as long as it is healthy.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you must apply cautery to it.
When you have cut it, and the ulcer is on the edge, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the ulcer that is inside first. and when it is swollen, then cure the outside.
For when you cure it together, it is not assured that the edge of the ulcer will not be perforated, and comes blackness and corruption in its edge and in the gut.
then you must remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply on it a plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the bark of pomegranate trees and lichen, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
And if a flow of blood comes from it, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cauteries are helpful in two conditions together: it is for knowing, for the flow of blood, and for the corruption;
and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you put or conduct onto the rod a chain of lead, and let the patient urinate through it;
and when the skin is tight around the head of the rod which is for those who have not been circumcised, or it is because of a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scratch with a sharpened instrument, so much that the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the rod is freed from all sides;
and if it is a grievous thing to divide this, then it is necessary that you scratch with a spatula or some pointed tool at the head of the rod and of the skin;
Then he must separate gently between II, and put I subtle bandage of wet linen on the cold limb, so that it does not stiffen again.
Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds; In every way when we do this work of our will, and especially for children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired by experimentation.
For I have seen the greatest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision in the hand, and with force, and all novelty;
if it happens to the heart that it has two tiles, and by chance if one covers this below and remains uncovered above. When the knee is injured, and the pain is doubled, and in the treatment that is given to it, the point of the member is not assured.
and in the treatment of the ankle by accident the iron escapes, and the work is ruined, and often it happens that they do not need treatment and I have seen it.
Of the treatment that is done to the threads of the string I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well both the healthy and the diseased.
For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in the whole stretch; but that the threads are well enclosed within the leather;
and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him tie the thread to the rod so tightly, and then you make it come out in all the ways that you can;
Then make it straight between your hands, and push the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the veins are not visible, nor any of the tendons.
Then put your hand to the rod and blow into the wound, and pull it up high as long as the head of the rod is inside; Then clean it well of the pus that has accumulated, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it under the navel to the other navigation;
Then clean it well of the pus that has accumulated, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it under the navel to the other navigation; and tie it with the second ligature to the pouch and to the right index finger, and cut between the two threads, then lift the heart upwards hastily and pull the head of the rod; Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is a remedy; and put powder on it and on the wound a plaster made from a mixture of cooked egg white, rose water, and oil, and let it be until the next day, and treat with another treatment as long as he is sick.
The form of the forces at the mundification is this:
the two parts should be held and should be cut, and the parts should be as large as the same size of the hands:
The mistake in the mundification is when the inner heart goes to the incision;
then it is necessary that you stretch it with your finger, so that the limbs make an abscess;
and shape it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, hold it with clamps, and then shape it.
And if it lasts three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, then let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and the scab lightly;
if you shape it as you can, and guard the part of the rod, it will not harm him at all.
Heal then the wound of things burned by powder, which we have said to treat with powders, and if one cuts beyond measure, and it goes to the sides, so it will not harm.
Heal the wounds, as we have said, until they are healthy.
Retention of the urine
The retention of urine is from blockage of the kidney, or from frozen blood, or from bowel, or from dead flesh, or from similar things, which we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the kidney which is stopped or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and let his feet be placed on the back, and stretch his belly from the back to the upper part of the back, and constrain the patient's arm as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the pressure on the stone above, because of which the urine is dislocated;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
and let it be of subtle silver, lightweight and hollow, like a bird's feather; and let its tube be a palm and a half in length, and let it be subtle at the end.
And the method of issuing the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie at the end a small piece of wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread inside the syringe;
and cut off the excess of the wool and push it just to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and with egg white, and have the patient sit on a seat, and anoint the bladder and the rod with moist oil of olive and of tallow;
Then lightly put the syringe on the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then fold the rod back towards the bundle.
Then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming up to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless for that which leads where it goes is twisted;
Then insert the thread into all of the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and make the urine flow.
and reintroduce the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
When scales or blood come into the bladder, or when putridness is assembled, and you see distillations of sharp remedies, then make all the instrument that is called "clyster", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has three openings: Two of one kind, and one of another, as you see;
and the limbs are shaved because the medicine should be such that it cuts well the stick without addition, if one can then treat the moisture, and beat when necessary;
and when you see that your medications are in the bladder, put the head of the caster in the moisture, and treat the one who is inside;
if you treat the moisture with the caster, and then strongly beat the one who is inside; if the moistures enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle syringe with which one injects into the bladder:
And it is of silver or of brass, and the head is higher;
and remove to the fat the bad blood;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you want to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a twisted thread of wool, and heat that moisture on the fire;
then put the end of the cleanser in the rod, then strain your hand on the bladder to extract all the moisture completely, until the patient feels that the moisture has gone into the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle as one joins a bag, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
and do so as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already spoken in the division of the ways of stones, and the extraction together with medicines;
and have said the difference between the stone in the kidneys as testicles, and all the symptoms, and in which stone one should operate with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the rod;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder often happens to children, and it's a sign that the water of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety;
and it openly injures, and troubles the patient's rod, and causes them to urinate many times, and then strangles; and in many of these wounds the foundations
and the healing of children is easy until they are 4 years old, and is very grievous in old men, and is similar to the young, for those who are between youth and old age;
and the treatment is easier for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with enemas, in order to purge all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders one from seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and bend and move to the bottom, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from the high place;
then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands are below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declined downwards;
then touch the wound from inside;
if you feel the stone in the bladder, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall upon touching everything, anoint your right index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is old, or your right middle finger, if the patient is a young adult; and thrust it to its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if it sticks to the neck of the bladder;
then press on with your finger, and thrust it downwards where you see fit to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the intestines upwards, and with his left hand hold the skin which is below the intestines in the area where the incision is made;
then he wraps the spatula with a bandage, from which this is the shape: And make between that which is between the intestines and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left navel;
and let it be straight on the stone, and the two edges be even or equal to the fundament, and let the width of the strip be such that it is wide by width, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
by chance the press if the edge which is on the fundament, so that it jumps without effort;
and know that there is a part of stone where it has corners and edges: thus it is easy to extract;
and if the part that is swallowed, resembles a nut, and is round, of which the exit is slight.
At the sky hence where it has corners and edges, make the cut larger;
and if it does not heal, then you must extract on the tendons that are as tight as a line to the head, for over-tightening the stone so that it does not shatter; or you apply beneath the subtle curved instrument to the head;
and if you cannot introduce it thus, then enlarge a little the perforation, and without unraveling, extract with a glass tube;
and if it has more than one stone, then put first the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut into it, then pull downward, and the small ones afterward if there are several;
And if it is very large, then it is necessary to operate, and make a larger wound. For these things have happened to the patient: where it dies, or the urine comes out again through the place where the limbs cannot solder;
but nevertheless you force to pull, or to strip the tendons, until you pull it apart by pieces;
and when you have completed your work, then apply the plaster of incense and of balm and of dragon's blood, and strain it, and put on top a moistened cloth in oil and in wine, or in oil and in hot rose and cold rose, to appease the hot abscess; then sit the patient up on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you untie it, then anoint the limb well with oil and rosewater, then treat it with ointment of galbanum and ointment of basil, until it is healed.
And if an abscess forms in the wound and ulcers, and there is a coagulation of blood in the bladder, and the urine is retained by this means, which is connected in such a way that without exit with the urine: Then put your finger into the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and rot it;
Then elevate the wound from the cold and the draft and the humidity, and aid it in all the ways that you know, until it is healed;
and it is necessary that all the parts that you cure, that you tie the two thighs, and apply the medicines on the wound.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and stuck in, and the urine cannot come out; If the treatment of what I say is not effective, that you often cut, it is excused from the cutting for this treatment. I have already proven it thus.
Take the iron instrument in this shape and let it be with three angled points in one piece:
then take the thread and tie it around the rod under the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
then push the instrument into the rod gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the instrument with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
if urine comes out at that time, then press your hand on the part which remains of the stone that is inside the rod. If it is thus broken, and the blood comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do it for any thing that is lacking, then tie the thread under the stone and the other above, then make the rod straight on the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and heal them as long as they are healthy.
of the bladder of women
It rarely happens that the bladder is injured in women, and if it does happen, then the treatment is grievous, and is forbidden for three things:
one is that by chance the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-versed and aware of her own body, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in this art with her hands;
and the fourth manner is that the bladder of the woman is deeper than that of the man, because it requires making a deeper incision, and there is great danger. And if it is necessary to do so, then it is required that you take a wise midwife, and with points investigate thoroughly, and if you do not find it, ask for the wisest and most subtle midwife;
and present to them a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and instruct her to do what you instruct regarding the examination of the stone; and observe very well if the woman is a virgin:
and observe very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her hand or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, if the pain presses her hand, and instruct her to put her hand or with the patient, and seek and press her left hand on the belly firmly.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gently from the entrance of the belly down, as far as it comes to the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the womb, where it appears to be misplaced, and feel the stone in that area; and let his finger move under the stone or above, and let the cut be small at first;
and let his finger move under the stone or above, and let the cut be small at first; then probe the wound with a small instrument, if you feel the stone growing in the plaque so much that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have edges.
if you know the similarities to recognize the disease.
And if the blood does not stop, then put on the wound a warm application of vitriol, and hold it for an hour until the blood is stanched;
then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone for men to help you in your work;
and if the blood does not come out, and it is from the artery that is cut, then put powder on the wound and constrain with tourniquets and bandages, and do not restart this, and leave the stone alone and do not extract it, lest by chance the patient would die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the limbs are strengthened, then return to your work, as long as the stone is not removed.
Rumor aqueous is nothing but an accumulation of moisture or whitish fluid, which is discharged from the heart of the kidneys, that contains the urine;
and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly found in the fabric of the urine, so that one thinks this is another urine; and it's the skin of the ankle between the white skin that we have spoken of;
and this does not happen to few people. And the generation of this branch is from weakness that comes to the ankles, and the material spreads.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the ankles, and this moisture has many colors: or it's a color declining to yellow, or it's without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs of recognizing this gathering, for if it is or white skin that we have spoken of, then there are abscesses behind, a little long as the figure of an egg, and the ankles do not appear, for it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own layer, then there are abscesses behind with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it's another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the legs and the white surface, then it seems good to him;
then when you want to know the color of the moisture, investigate thoroughly in all the intermuscular spaces, because of which the shape is formed in front. According to what comes after the intermuscular, judge what is inside.
And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
then put a cushion under his back, on something a little high, and put many towels under him;
then sit on his left, and instruct the servant to sit on the right, and stretch the rod to one of the two ribs at the side of the legs;
then take the spatula in hand, and cut the skin of the legs in length as far as the knee, and let the incision be straight, dividing the skin of the legs to the white surface, and scrape subtly according to his power;
Then pierce the syphac with a needle of the vein to the large perforation, and extract the entire vein, and then put your clamps, and let the syphac be above;
and do not touch the heart of the intestines, but only the syphac; Cut all or in pieces, removing the subtle costa from it, that if you do not cut well wisely, the vein will return;
and if the ulcer heals quickly on its own, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the vein;
Then assemble the two lips of the intestine's opening to a suture, then treat it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the ulcer corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decrement of blood;
Then cut around the navel, and extract the vein, and treat it as we have said.
And if the team is assembled into two parties together, know that these are two branches; Cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put on the wound a moist linen cloth in oil or rose water;
Cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put on the wound a moist linen cloth in oil or rose water; and put on another moist linen cloth in wine and oil, and put on the two navels, and put above them doubled blankets, and tie it all up with a string which is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and fill them with linen dressing according to this likeness and let them be assembled by sewing on the throat of the arms, and one of the hands hold it at the bottom against the back, and the other at the part of the groin;
and the other two veins at the ankles, and let the whole assembly of the restraint be in the bend of the arm;
and sometimes this kind of cauterization is applied to the iron cautery on the body, and it is that you take a fine surgical cautery, and cut the skin of the intestines, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white skin that contains the ailment is discovered;
if you take the cautery in this manner, and pierce that skin with the sharp edge, and scrape it with this fine hot cautery:
And cut in all the ways that you can, until you have scraped everything;
and beware that the fat does not touch the bone;
and know that this work is more beneficial to health; and beware of the flowing of blood, and doctors who are unskilled in surgery;
and if nothing makes you contrary, or an abscess forms or a flow of blood or another thing, then cure that which makes you contrary, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horror, then perform perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned that the humor is at the site, then make the patient sit on a elevated seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below at all the spatula to the width, and put the perforation along the length of the body;
and let the opening be wide, so that the whole water can flow out;
then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining water flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the white fabric does not allow the pus to exit from the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you apply a bandage or the instrument with which one treats the pus of dropsical patients, whose shape is thus described;
and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the pus returns, and it is assembled after six months or in which interval, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient's days will pass.
Know that in the cutting of this branch there is fear in many conditions, because it seems to me that moving it is better than leaving it.
and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and especially to the intestines; and it is in many cases.
It is to be known by a surplus of bitter and sharp humour, which is spread to the intestines, or from a blow;
and it is the colour of the abscess according to the colour of the body; and does not find a point of pain, and is a grievous abscess;
and by chance is an abscess which is grievous, foul and stone-like, and of a dark colour, and sometimes comes from a corruption of artery, or from an inflammation of a vein.
When it is from a corruption of an artery, it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers; and it is not suitable that you touch it.
That which is made from an inflammation of a vein is known by its disposition to the expression of touching with the fingers, and can make a good diagnosis based on this similarity, and on other symptoms; and it is that you cut around the area of the abscesses, then the pus comes out, and the white skin above it, and delivers the suspensor from all parts of the abscess.
If the pus is already swollen with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you draw out the pus, and cut around it;
and if it is near the skin, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver the entire tendon, and cut around it completely.
And if the growth of the wound is in the back of the limb, then it is necessary that you cut it entirely, and extract the pus, as we have said.
And when the work is accomplished, then apply the wound with a moist plaster of oil and wine, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope resembling a bud, with the softening of the boils, and the patient complains grievously when he walks;
and the treatment of this illness is just as frightening as the one before, and nevertheless we will tell you its work, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a seat that alleviates it, then apply the suspensor to the boils below your fingers, to all the vessels that are near the privy parts, and tie the masters, and extend them forcibly;
then cut with the spatula, cutting widely through to open up the vessels, as long as they are discovered, and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
Then he fixes a needle where it has a double thread, and ties it to the first wound where the blood came, and ties it on the other side; Then he cuts them in the middle straightforwardly, according to the length of the body, and removes the corrupted humors;
Then he cures the wound like the others or applies a poultice, so that no vessel bursts which would nourish one of the ulcers;
For from this comes no evil, and if all the vessels come to life, then it is necessary to treat the ulcers with regard to all the vessels; so that the bones do not lose their nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and dry and cannot be helped.
The coming of this illness is from the section that comes to the spleen, or the stretching on the belly in the area of the ribs, because the intestine descends from that rupture to one of the ulcers;
and this curvature is from the pain of the liver, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes:
from a blow, or from a jump, or from a blow with the arm, or from lifting of heavy objects, and from similar things;
and the symptoms when it is from the extension of the liver, are that they come on little by little, in a long stretch, and do not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even up to the depth, because the liver presses on the intestine.
And the symptoms are when it is from the affection of the liver, that it causes sudden pain to appear, and there are diverse abscesses appearing under the skin, pressed close, and it is due to the escape of the intestine and the body being weakened by the liver.
And sometimes the intestines adhere to the liver, and are retained there, and cause great pain for the patient to suffer, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments with fear, because of which he must avoid.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to put his hand inside the wound to repair the intestine if it can be returned. then let him sit on your neck, between your hands, and lift up the thighs;
then stretch the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the intestines from along the length; then put within the liver of the waist, twelve inches according to what you have as a task for opening the wound, and let it be such that the bones can come out;
then scrape the thin layer that is beneath the skin of the intestines, until the white thin layer is exposed on all parts;
then put your right index finger in that which enters the intestine, in that which is between the white thin layer that is beneath the skin of the navel, and between the second thin layer, and separate that which is behind the navel, and between the second thin layer;
and then move to the right hand within the heart of the intestines, and let the white surface appear on top at your left hand, and raise the upper part towards the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the upper part upwards, and untie that which is tied behind the bandage;
and ask your fingers if there is a point on the intestine that has an enveloped or white hard surface, and if you find anything, then push it down to the bottom of the belly;
then take a needle or one with a large thread made of threads, and push it into the rear part of the surface, which is behind the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear with threads, until there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the surface, which we have spoken of, that is behind the skin of the intestines, with a strong thread of two parts; Then envelop the heads of the veins, and tie them in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter into them, lest the abscess should grow. and put a ligature according to the first ligature long two fingers of that one, and after these two ligatures leave two threads which are hidden near the heart of the body the size of a finger; and afterwards all the rest according to the roundness that the swelling brings;
then cut in the part which is near the skin of the body, as far as the blood and the flesh, as we have said before;
then put a moist bandage in oil, and apply it to the wound, and also apply the ligature that we have mentioned. And sometimes the aforementioned swelling is cauterized, after the incision, due to suspicion of a decrease in blood. For this happens often, and leaves the ligament as long as it dries by itself;
and if it is late in healing, apply a warm poultice, and put on what we have said, until it dries;
then treat the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this weakness I have never seen anyone who dare to make the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is made like the weakness which is assembled to the bowels, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after the cut above and below lightly with dressings;
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of what has happened, until the vessels dry;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes swelling comes to the shoulders, as we have said, and it opens the joints;
and does not touch any of the intestines to the bowels, and if they do touch them, it is little, and repairs all hours;
and however if it stays too long in this spot, the wound or catarh grows, until the intestine touches;
and this happens due to the extension of the cataract which is in the shoulders, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and swollen are the joints and opened;
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have previously said;
and sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient puts his back between your hands, then cut the joint of the swollen shoulder according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the skin flap that is underneath the skin which is called the membrane, then take the fat and put it on the apparent bone of the flap;
and press to the bottom of the belly, then sew the two apparent bones of the flap on the head of the fat, and sew one and the other;
then extract the head of the fat, and do not cover any point of the flap nor extend the vein to anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines; then heal it by the treatment of wounds.
then heal it by the treatment of wounds. And when you sew the skin, if it becomes infected and treat the wound, until it is healed.
The flap is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterizations are moved on this place, and closer to health.
of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Many times is softened the skin of the intestines in some men, because the entrails that are inside are made soft, and it is bad to see;
and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on his back, and to cut the softened skin on the natural skin;
then bring the two lips together to a stitch, and if you see, first cut away the excess of softened skin to three stitches or four firmly;
then cut between the stitches, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed, and tighten the thread.
of the treatment
Purging is included in our law, and for this reason it pleases me that I do not speak of it in this book;
and it is not necessary to use force for the two manners:
one of which is that the doctor responds with wisdom when one asks him, and with wisdom the treatment;
and the other, because we often have need of the chastisement of certain beasts to help us, such as goats and rams and cats and other beasts.
I say then that punishment is done according to two methods: either by traction, or by incision.
In the one that we do by traction, we make the beast sit in hot water, until the joint is softened and flexible; then we take them with our hand, until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Of the punishment of cutting: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then lift it up, and cut above each hoof, as soon as you have well examined them;
and let none of the thick skin and the subtle skin which is on the vessels;
and this manner of punishment is better than that which is made by traction, because in traction something from the intestines often remains by chance, for which the beast desires luxury;
then treat the wound until it is healthy.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is in two manners to men: one is that between the two hips appears as if the figure of a woman's nature, where there is hair, and sometimes outside there is urine.
And the other manner is in women, and has on the genitals as if a penis and two hips.
And the treatment of the man and the woman is that you cut the adjacent flesh all around, and treat it as other wounds;
In the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the kidneys, there is no point of cure.
The tendon is a cord joined to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the cure.
It is necessary to hold the excess of the tendon with your hand or with the nails, and cut it lightly;
and do not go too deep in the flesh, lest a flow of blood come, for one cure drives out another cure as long as it is healthy;
and for another sore that is born at the mouth of the marrow, and the filling, and by chance breaks out, and is similar in appearance to a cow's, and for this they call it the ancient "cow disease". If it is necessary to amputate, as we have said the incision, and the treatment until it is healed.
Rheumatism is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the passage is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to be;
and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to be; or it is from heat adjusted, or from subtle or sharp humor, and it is made in the marrow, or in the sides, or in the back, or wherever it may be;
and prevents conception, and childbirth, and by chance causes flowers to have;
and the knowledge of this is through the observation of the urine.
If the swelling appears to be near the fingers or the veins.
If it is a subtle and sharp humor, and it is near the kidneys, then hasten, and bend the knee:
Put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
Then stretch the two labia majora, as much as the subtle vulva skin is rounded, and let the stoppages be covered;
Then take the needle, and anoint it with oil, and put it on the place, and give the woman a house remedy each day, so that she cannot suffer.
And if the vulva is hard and swollen, then it is necessary to cut the spatium resembling a knife to the shape of a myrtle leaf.
If the stoppages are made of new flesh, then suck on the onion and cut it;
and apply the blood-stanching medications, such as haemostatic, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with some oil;
Then put on a bandage of wide cloth, so that the wound cannot suffer;
and let it be for a long time, and apply a bandage of dry flax.
then let him be cured with other cures until he is healthy.
And when in the marrow comes new flesh, if it is necessary to cover it in this manner, then it is not an abscess that forms. For the abscess that forms in the marrow, one should not touch it with iron.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are ruptures of veins to which a custom arises, and when the hemorrhoids are old they become weak.
and we have already said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive a cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and the weakness, when they are deep in the marrow and do not appear to feeling, are not cured with iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the stomach, one can feel, are those that one can cure.
It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, afterwards apply warm bandages, and bind it at its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things;
then put her feet in warm water for an hour, then put her in cold water;
and if discharge of blood comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumach and the bark of pomegranate trees and of gall and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster to put on her back.
And if it stains, it's good. If that is not so, then have cauterized the ventouses on the back and the same for the sides to strike;
then take the wool, and the mallet in juice of plantain or in juice of aglentier with old wine, and cauterize on the spot.
And when the abscess has burst, then treat the place of the wound as long as it is sore;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so it is necessary to scrape as I have said in the previous theorem; and then treat it until it is healthy.
Many kinds of abscess come in the marrow, such as cancer and apostema, pierous and herpes and eczemas and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have spoken of in the division.
It is necessary then that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that affect the bowel.
and if you want to know the work of iron, then observe that the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red then you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce, but make an incision as long as the pain is alleviated;
and then make the patient sit on a seat, and let him have two small seats or where he can lean, and support himself on his back and gather his feet together as far apart from the thigh;
and let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a linen band;
Then suck the bulge towards the right side, and insert the instrument through which one evacuates the mouth of the abscess, from which afterwards comes the shape;
and it is necessary that when you have seen the instrument inserted, that you fix the rod first to know the depth of the abscess, so that what enters inside the instrument does not go more deeply than it should, and that it does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are large, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the abscess with cloths, so that the instrument does not injure it;
and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument to the bottom, and that he holds the instrument.
And when the abscesses open, and one makes a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover the head with a spatula, to the left;
and when the wound is empty, it is necessary that you put in the wound moist tents in rose oil or in dry green oil;
and put the tent far from the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put on top of the marrow and on the bandage a clean moist cloth in water or wine if they are cooked;
then treat afterwards for two days with oil having arrived at that place, until it is healed;
and sometimes raise the marrow and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and dried aristolochia, if they are cooked; then return to the treatment.
And if the wound is pushed back into the marrow, it is necessary that you guard against iron cauterization, but rather treat it as we have said in the section.
Of the swelling The midwife is first to examine the natural shape of the swelling, and its signs when you see the woman approaching from below, and wants to smell the air:
then the fetus hurries to come out with force; then you will know that this swelling is according to the natural shape, and it comes out from its head, and the second with it;
and when you see these signs, then you should gently press her belly, so that the fetus comes out completely;
for when it descends from its head, then the second one comes with it, and the mother is freed from her superfluities by good purification;
and this which comes abnormally does not come naturally.
For it comes sometimes from its feet, and comes force against the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes from its belly, or penis, and is turned by chance over its neck, and by other deformed shapes;
It is necessary for the healer to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the methods as one ought to help.
If the afterbirth comes out naturally, and the woman gives birth easily, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, or let the women hold her.
and let its natural oil or rendered fat be cooked, and then let the healer insert between her thighs the small spatula, of which this is the form: and cut the second layer, and cut to one's nail as much as the mucus that is in the corpse of the fingers;
and press on the woman's belly until the afterbirth comes down, and if it does not come down, then it is necessary to give the woman an enema of rendered fat with oil of cypress;
then make them press and stretch the condyls, and hold their mouth and nose for an hour: if it is now in the sinews.
And if both hands are swollen, then you must reset them lightly little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high; then remove the seat from the ground, and hold onto the woman, so she does not fall with the removal;
and if the hands cannot enter, and the sinews are dead, then cut the hands at the joint which is placed there before, and extract the infant, and reset evenly.
of the issue of the infant on its feet When the sinews come to the feet, then it is necessary to push from above; and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
then take the feet and stretch them little by little.
When it jumps just above the hips, if it is commanded to be grasped, and the leg is stretched by condition; if it jumps far, God wills.
And if it does not go far as we have said, then turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is lightly.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take a muscle of the thigh, and oil of Kisam, and melted gum, and pound all in a mortar; and apply this ointment to the nature of the woman within and without, then make her sit in a warm bath until the hips are soaked;
and when it is swollen, make for him a plaster of myrrh, and put it on, and leave it for an hour; then make him sit on a seat, then make him throw up and hold his mouth and nose, and press his belly gently, for the swelling will go down now.
of the discharge of the infant upon its knees When the swelling comes in this manner, then put a poultice on his hands a little and a little; then let it be applied to his neck, and his feet hang down, and let him lie in the bed; and rub his hands a little and a little, and then press his hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from under him, until it is prepared below; and if the swelling does not go down, then take his feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then beat your hands; and little by little the child vomits; and instruct the woman to hold herself so that the fetus is pressed.
of the issue of the child who has one arm outside it is necessary to bring back the hand: if you cannot bring it back, have the woman get up and walk;
if she cannot walk, have her lie on the bed, and stretch out her legs forcibly;
then anoint the muscle that I have described;
and if she does not deliver, have her sit on a seat, then make an effort to bring back the hand; and deliver the child according to its natural position, and have it turned, and instruct her to hold herself so that the fetus is pressed out.
of the issue of the child on its neck, and it has expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back; It is necessary that the patient holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and lifts the arm lightly;
and when it is even, put on the natural muscle of the upper arm and elbow, as we have said, then instruct that it moves little by little;
and when you have done this, make him sit on a seat, and instruct him to take himself; and make him stretch. of the same manner for the whole second one
of the same manner for the whole second one When it comes to this manner for the whole second one, cut the second one with your nail, until the mucus is emptied;
and if it enters into his face and neck, then cut it from the mouth, so it is not retained, and remove the mucus;
then turn the infant from within, until you have put it as it is necessary, and instruct the woman to take herself at another time:
from the exit of the twins It is known that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if rarely named;
Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if rarely named; I know that they should be multiplied, and are divided by the liver which conceives them, which is tied to the navel;
and sometimes they come out naturally like all the other foetus, as we have said.
And if they come out quickly, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle bath, and make everything light and easy what it does; and do thus as it is worth for health. of many children
Certain times they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious sage, and it is necessary that the wise woman knows all this, for by chance similar things happen; thus do according to what is necessary
of the dead child
When you treat the woman of the dead or stillborn child, as I have said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to perform a manual operation; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of good virtue, and has no accident or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her thighs be bent downwards, and her legs be raised;
and the midwife applies the bandage of two parts, or it is tied to the bed so that it is not treated for the descent of the infant;
then rub the mouth of the newborn with moistened oils of nutmeg and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint its hands with these oils and these rubbings;
then gently rock the newborn, then turn it on its side where it rocks the elbows that are suitable for that, and take care that the infant is prepared so that it descends onto its chest;
if it puts its elbows in its eyes or on its neck or in its mouth or on its palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs, and if the descending is onto its feet, then it will put or prick and has wounded sides;
and it is necessary that he takes the onion with his right hand, and puts the curve between the two fingers of the left hand, and bends all his hand lightly, and inserts the onion into one of those places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
then insert one against another onion, or thou thyself in this craft, so that the extraction be even;
and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to another, for the sake of extraction, and let the onions be held by the teeth, as this is the form:
And if one part remains, then anoint the ball with some of his fingers of oil, and put them in that part, and pull out the other part;
and if there remains a point, then put this onion in a higher place, and do this until everything goes out.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back due to the strain, then you must wrap it in a bandage, as long as it is swollen; then put the cup on the joint of the sole of the foot or on the heel, and thus you must do on the other hand, and on the two feet.
And if the head of the infant is large and it is constricted in the birth passage, or it has an assembled or tangled head, then you must put the spinous spondulus between your fingers, and make the head and extract the shoulder; or you round it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus same make the veins have a large natural head;
and then draw the bones to the tendons, and if the head is sound and it holds by strength, even if it is cracked, as long as the moisture that is in the bottom comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with the knife that you hold;
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce through until the moisture flows.
And if the swelling is on his feet, then the treatment is gentle, and the adjustment to the mouth of the marrow is easy.
And if it is narrow in the belly or in the chest, then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and pierce the belly or the chest, until the moisture that is there flows;
and if the other members are swollen, and the head remains still, then take the balance of his hand in front of the marrow, and draw it just to the mouth of the marrow; then anoint the wound with one or two ounces of oil, and apply the bandage;
and if the mouth of the abscess is constricted by hot aposteme that has come to it, then it is not necessary to operate, but rather to apply warm and greasy things; and let the plasters be applied, and put in water softening and moistening substances.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then apply what we have said for a living child;
and let no one touch it, so apply the bandage in pieces, and do not leave anything of the secondine.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said regarding hot abscesses that come to the abscess;
and if a flow of blood comes, then it should be put in astringent water, and apply other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose belly had a dead infant, then one congealed on that, and the other was also dead. After long tension, he came to have abscesses on his navel, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to suppurate greatly.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not cauterize the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another. I was very amazed, because the belly has no pointed bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead infant.
I searched the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was in a better state; and the woman urinated for a long time afterwards, and also issued a little bit of bile from the body;
and I have not recalled this chapter before because of that, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to provide aid.
Then comes the shape of the presser, where one turns the limbs;
and to the two turnings at the two heads of the two ligaments. In all ways, the horns should be more subtle than the restrainer, and made from ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the wooden one two fingers in width, and the margin of the trees two fingers, and a palm and a half in length; and between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are fixed on one and on the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the hammer to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, made similar to it but more subtle and lighter, should be made of the wood of ebony or boxwood, according to the similarity of the tendons. and it has two heads two joints, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers in width;
and when you see to open the marrow to all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, the feet hanging and the legs spread, then put the two joints joined together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument separated between her thighs; then put your hand on the instrument, as you have done with the tendons equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the marrow, until the ball makes what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the eyes are prepared, so much more swift is the work, and higher are the men for their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you do not have prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in the infant, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her expel the mucus, and hold her hands at the mouth and nose; and if she spits through that, well it is.
If not, then take the vessel, and make a poultice or suppository, and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the matrix, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire;
Then put a cane or stick through the hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow, and hold it until the vapors come out from inside the marrow;
then do the rubbing, as we have said. If the second joint is injured.
And if it remains after this treatment, and is not better, instruct the woman to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in mastiche of nutmeg, and then put it on the affected area, and treat the second joint; and when she has found it, if she takes it and slowly stretches it straight, so that the marrow does not break with the extraction;
but then you should gently move it to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes and disentangles.
And if the mouth of the thigh is constricted, we have said the treatment of purification, and of fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not from all that which we have said, beware that you do not foolishly touch the tendon;
but it is necessary that which is at the mouth of the thigh, that you bind it to the hip of the woman, then anoint her with Tetrapharmacum ointment; if the poultice is applied and replaced, and comes a fever;
but in any case, when it suppurates if there comes bad smell to the stomach and to the head, and troubles the patient. If then there is need for fumigations of cubebales for that:
some of the ancients have experienced fumigation with croton and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument by which one purges the woman with retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this:
And it is to be seen similar to a chain, and put the thin head into the nature, and the wide feet on the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the cauterization as long as it is wasted, and start again with another.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, instead the passage is stopped up with a thin mucus: then it is necessary to the nurse that she pierce that mucus with her finger, and not pierce the tender spatule, and warn the child that it not touch;
then put on the moistened spot with wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing as long as it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it will not straighten, then put or pass a chain of wool, and let the hands be still, and be careful when the veins want to go into the chambers.
And sometimes there comes sudden swelling of a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to treat that one suddenly: it should be treated, as we have said regarding the chain of wool.
Fistulas that come from the bottom are an annoyance, and worse than those that come from the bottom of the fundament, or in the space between the two parts, either to one fistula or more;
and when that annoyance is old, it works, and increases moisture with white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
and they are known by that which comes out in evacuation or flatulence when the patient has diarrhea, and by chance in jumping of a vessel.
And if there are fistulas that reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod; and they come close to the joint of the thigh, and close to the hollow of the knee.
And thus one recognizes the fistula that penetrates to the foundation, and does not penetrate: and it is that you apply your finger to the index or foundation, and apply a subtle needle of spider or iron in the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, then apply a thread of delicate flax, or the hair of a horse, until you feel the thread or the hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come through evacuation or flatulence or urine, as we have said: let them know that they do not penetrate deeply; if you hasten to apply a cure.
And when the fistula is near the bladder or near the passage of the urine, if it cuts off the flow of urine, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced near the joint of the thigh, then the tendon comes near the flesh; if there is no twisting and the invention of the pain inside, then it is that it comes from the elbow, and not worth a medicine or a dressing with oil;
and in these fistulas near the skin there is no cure except for work, and vanity of foolish doctors who insert themselves.
In the one that is not near the skin and is not ancient, there is hope of health through cauterization, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient puts between your hands on their back;
and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined to his stomach; then he pulls out a piece of arrow, or of lance if there is a fracture, until you know where the piece comes from.
If the patient feels it inside the foundation, then you must pull out your second finger, if afterwards it seems that the piece has perforated;
and is discovered where you feel between your fingers the spleen or the flesh, then know that it is pierced; if not working on it one cannot heal it.
One can heal some with all methods, but this happens rarely;
and the aid that one gives, is to apply the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and thrust all hot into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, until you know that these false ulcers are cauterized, which resemble a peacock's feather;
and then treat with wet tents in butter, until that false ulcer is raw, then treat with a greasy ointment and searing and soldering.
If it is thus healed, it is good.
For that, nothing else can be healing;
and if it has a tent between, and does not perforate just to the finger that is at the bottom, and between your finger and the tent a thick cover of flesh or of scab, and you see the fistula in this which follows the cover of the abscess; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and thrust immediately before the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent; and the tendon will be delivered, and will fall;
then I define those fallen charms that seem a pin of bone, and nothing remains.
And if the blood comes to an end, and cuts between you and the work, then the cauterization of fire or of sharp medicine.
For the cauterizations of fire join two bone things: it is to know, the articulation of these joined charms, and the stopping of blood and the drying of the moisture;
then the cure of moist tendons in butter or in crushed things, until the limbs give ease, and thus the charms are set in the ease;
then cure the wound of sudden injuries with hard charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not come back.
And if a fistula comes from deep within the foundation, and it is separated from the body, then apply a poultice to the bottom or foundation, and inquire about that.
If you feel the tent, and between two is the web or the skin or flesh, or it is pressed to pierce, if there is not a way of escape and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut from the bottom, or if you can put tents and cure as before;
and do not go too deep, lest you cut the tendons that hold the foundation, and come to the egutions by the willful sensibilities; then cure it, as we have said;
then cure it, as we have said; by adventure it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and clean it since it is cut deep within the foundation, either by tent or by another pointed instrument; then anoint the wound with that ointment which is in the plaster, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part opposed to the foundation:
then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part opposed to the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And often are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the thread into the fistula, and it is or touches the bottom of the foundation beneath the skin, if take a thread pierced at the head in this form: And I push the twisted thread into II, and push the thread with all the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
If it passes in the margin of the bottom within, then pull out the thread from that which has passed through, so that you push your finger on the bottom;
and draw the head of the thread, and assemble the two parts together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for one or two days;
and hold it in place several times, until the thread joins these parts that are between the two, and adheres;
then treat the wound until it is sewn and healed.
If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all ways that you can, if the flesh is not too thick. For it is not necessary to make a incision through the thick flesh, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the sharp spinous spatula that one makes for the fistula is very pointed at one end and cutting; and on the other side not, because one does not join what one should not join, as you see here:
Swollen areas are according to two methods: or they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and sometimes with blood, and there is one or several, and they are on the surface of the foundation and at the head of the foundation;
but those that are on the surface have little moisture, and sometimes have a little yellowish or greenish discharge, or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment for those who have them within the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to squeeze himself in chambers, until the foundations issue forth, and the fibers appear; if you hurry it, and hold it with forceps, or you hold it on your nail, then cut it at its roots;
and if the ulcers cannot be held back by their moisture, then they take to the scalpel, or to the cauterizing iron, or to a piece of chamel. and extract them with the tongs, then cut them, and powder above some warm powders that are in the cauterizing iron; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then cure them with other cures until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot be evacuated, then give the patient a sharp and bitter enema to wash out what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly; when the sick person feels better, and if the thread is pulled from the bottom, then the treatment is a light one;
when the sick person feels better, and if the thread is pulled from the bottom, then the treatment is a light one; and it is that you take them with your nail or with the pincers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron. If it happens that you must perform the cauterization in this manner:
If it happens that you must perform the cauterization in this manner: Take a thread, and put it on a needle, and then draw the thread through and make the needle penetrate from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread around the needle, and let it be of the width;
and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do thus to all the others, and leave one to stop the excessive flow of blood;
then put on the foundation a moistened cloth dipped in rose oil or in cerate, and apply it to the foundation, and instruct the patient that he should rest;
and then let it be until it adheres, and when they have adhered, apply the treatment of bandage and other treatments, until he is healthy;
Dryness of the liver or foundation Many times there is dryness of the liver in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no value. It is necessary that you touch the point of a spatula or on one angle the outer skin, which does not let it become moist. then heal it as long as it is swollen as it is necessary;
and if it cannot be treated, then resume the rubbing stronger than before, until it bleeds much, and becomes scarred; then heal it as long as it is wounded.
of a tremor Furnacle is a small false appearance in the body, and goes very deep inside;
and sometimes it finds the cold, and one feels it as if dead from trembling, and it comes into the whole body, and more in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a vein from a wing of a goose, or a wing of a strong cultural, and put that vein on the forehead, so that the circles completely enclose the forehead inside; then turn your hand to take the vein all around so that you bind all around the forehead, and put it in the background, and clear the forehead of its roots.
And if you see, make it from a vein of copper or iron in this form, and be subtle below and pull above: nor prick, for it is enough to hold and press.
And if you see, cauterize the forehead, as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
Sometimes they make a cystere of silver or gold, or of melted copper or enamel;
and sometimes they make of these small and large instruments, according to what they are needed for. These things that one needs in the treatment of children and who are weak and ailing, are small.
These things that one needs in the treatment of children and who are weak and ailing, are small. The shape of the clamp, small and large, is thus wide, where the belly is tied in this manner:
and it has a separation where the belly should be tied, as you see, and the thing is perceived within;
and it has on one of its sides two openings, and on the other one;
and the belly or bag is made with medicines of a beast's bladder or of parchment, and is perforated all around with small openings, and has between each opening one thread of space, then sewn in these openings one strong thread of twisted cord, and assemble the belly as it is a sack; and when the medicine is inside, then apply a ligature in front of a strong thread, then give a clyster.
and it is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or with a gentle ointment, or a similar thing, then insert it gently; then the minister closes his two hands together as long as it takes, then withdraws the clyster, and lifts the patient's legs to his belly, and if the medicine wants to come out, holds it back as long as he can; and if he sleeps a night in this way, it is more beneficial help.
And if you clysterize him for a disease of cleansing of the stomach, and the medicine hastens to come out, then retain it as long as he is healthy.
And if there are ulcers or abscesses at the foundation, or apostemes, then the cluster should be as subtle as for a child;
and it is the form of a subtle cluster on which the skin is tight:
We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds;
now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places or where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are pieces of stone, and cuts of sword and of knife, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or similar things;
or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that cuts on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
And I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory of them comes in its own chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is large, and you suspect a warm abscess: if it makes so much blood from the head injury that it comes forth a little blood from the wound, and let the blood be on the contrary side of the injured part;
and forbid the patient excess of wine and coarse meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, let his food be diminished, and let him not drink wine, nor eat a lot of meat;
and put on the wound, if abscesses or a tumor comes, cotton moistened in oil or rose water, or in wine to apply;
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, powder, which I will discuss a little later;
and if the blood has been stirred, then put on some ointments, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like the size of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by stitches, then assemble them by sewing, as I will discuss for wounds of the belly, concerning the sewing.
If the wound is uncovered to the bone, and hangs, and does not hold except for a little, then cover it; Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore the scar tissue in the skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, such as boiled and roasted meat, also like birds, and similar things.
And if you find a rotten place on the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut out all the rotten part, and apply force, then heal it.
and if it has cut an artery in the wound or vein, without caution, and it cannot be stanched by medicine, then seek the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put in this powder which dries as soon as the blood has been shed.
And the method of the powder is thus: Take incense in part; blood of dragon two parts; carnelian alive three parts, and powder subtly, and apply to the wound, and extract firmly, until it adheres well and joins to all its flesh;
and then bind it well, and let it be without unbinding, so it does not swell; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes this with carnelian alone, when one does not have incense or blood of dragon, but that the arsenic has moved the wound.
And if the arsenic has moved the wound, likewise in summer, if one does not put on this powder;
but put on some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it is fully healed; then heal other healings as long as he is healthy
And if a fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pinces.
and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerves, do not apply any other treatment than to leave it alone, and do not put anything constricting, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract. and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But let the medicine be soothing, as warm water is applied to sweet oil, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked in warm water, and other stones of mining done in this manner, and ointments moistened.
And if the wound is large, then sew it with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hollow and full of pus, then puncture or lower the abscess;
and if the artery is cut, and with flowing blood comes, then dissect it, and ligate it, and cauterize, this is the surgeon's job;
and if the gullet of the throat is cut, or the trachea, and the conduit is blocked, through which the food goes, then sew the trachea to the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it back with bandages, and let some hours pass, then treat the dislocations of the joints for as long as it is wounded;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, thus the tumor; and if there are pieces of bone, thus the fractured parts that you can put back, and those that you cannot have, leave them until the wound suppurates, and is evacuated and the discharge is loosened;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has formed a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a blow from a spear or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound to estimate how much blood the patient has lost: It seems then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it with the blood that has not stopped flowing, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but I apply attractive ointment, and bind it to him twice a day;
and if you have no ointment, then put in the wound a lot of cotton to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more; if no spasm or trembling of the heart occurs, nor strangulation of the limbs; and when you see the bones in their proper place, then know that the wound is healed. Heal the thenar of tents and other treatments, as long as it is healthy;
and if it cannot heal, and becomes open, show that it has become fistulous;
if the treatment is as one ought. And if the wound is from a sword cut or a knife, and it is simple, or in the foot or on the back, then treat what is in front; if it is large, of stitching;
and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and in a cut in several pieces, thus cauterize the wound, and the torn parts if they are separated; and if they are not separated, then let the wound rot, to ease the extractions;
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
Drop of the rupture of the belly
The drops from the rupture of the belly are great and frequent and small;
of the large wound often comes out the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, by which the intrusion of the guts;
and the stitching is more troublesome, and often worse than the small wound the large one, because one puts back in more carefully the intestines, if one does not put them back quickly while still hot;
because the intestine swells as soon as it feels the cold, if they are put back in more carefully, and for this reason the middle wound is worse, because one puts back most of the intestine to its place than the others;
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
the two common stitches have in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of the other wounds of the body and the other special stitches are common to the other wounds;
and all of them are more prone to injury of the belly, and I will tell and declare each one.
I say that when the wound is small, and a thing from the intestine comes out, and it's difficult to put back, it is by one of the two methods: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is weakened by the cold.
And when it is frozen, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a cloth in hot water only, or you heat it with boiling water and pepper and cypress, and apply it to the intestine until the frozen part is thawed;
and sometimes this treatment must be repeated, and it's necessary that you apply it to soothe and to unfreeze.
And when you see the inflation departing, anoint the intestine with water or oil and evil humors are cooked, for by this is alleviated the entrance to a little of thing;
and if it cannot enter, make a little wound at the instrument through which one collects the humors;
and the first treatment is to move the stone, that we should not cut without great necessity or need;
and these are the instruments for cutting:
then cut within the concavity and do not cut through, and see to it the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine is healthy and strong, then put it back in its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power to do so, for this is a good thing.
When the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then put the head and the chest higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts then put attention to that so the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say for large and weak wounds.
For small wounds put what is suitable for you, then take it between your hands and administer gently so that it reaches all the rupture with its effect, and bring the lips together;
and this is the common manner of sutures, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound two fingers' space, and stick a needle where it has strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the suture, which is underneath the skin, until you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two ends of the suture in four gathered;
Then strain the thread of a double cord around the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound together, and then let the thread of the suture, and attach another needle.
Then thread the cord as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to your skill with the needles, until the entire wound is restrained.
and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse, for the subtle needles take all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well: for it is fitting that they be moderate;
and it is not fitting to push the needles too far into the flesh and through the skin, so that they do not catch and close the wound before the suture;
and then catch the heads of the needles, so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put tents or dressings on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and let them be until the wound is healed;
and this manner of treatment of the needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it suffices a needle or two.
The second treatment is common, and it is that you assemble the two parts of the skin and the two parts of the fascia together with a needle or that it has one strong middle thread;
and when you have pierced these parts all four together, then push the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner that one sews clothes;
and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a small coin;
this stitch suits the man, and I sewed a wound that one had in the abdomen, which was injured by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and it had come out of the intestines two palms in length, and the wound was in the middle of the abdomen.
I fetched the intestine then when it had been dead for 23 hours, and the wound was sewn until the 15th day, and I treated it, and it became healthy.
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I applied to the wound cotton twice a day, and washed it with warm water until he was healthy.
Now I will tell you the two proper manners of stitching:
take the needle, and sew the edge of the part from the outside to the inside;
when it has pierced the heart of one side to the other, then leave the head of the thread or the seam or where you have sewn the needle, and make it pierce the other part of the inside to the outside;
and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as well as the felt-maker makes the felts, and that you leave once the seam of one side, and take it up from the other, until the suture is entirely completed.
The second manner of suture, which the Gauls call their own, is thus: as some do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one edge of the seam to the other edge, in a certain way:
Put a needle or point of the thread close to the flesh, and make it pierce the flesh gently, and leave the two edges of the seam; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the upper part just to that inner part, between the two edges of the seam;
then make it pierce one and the other of the upper part just to that inner part, into the two other edges of the thread that are on the other side;
and it is the worst manner of fracture and the most common.
Galen says that if this rupture is proven by testimony, one should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather.
and it is known that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the sewing is more grievous than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as the artery has moved, then reset the intestine and the gut;
then put on the powder made from birthwort, and if the artery has moved, then apply some ointment that is suitable, until the wound closes. and they pull the thread, and are squeezed the veins, and the muscles; then heal the wound as with the others, until it is healthy;
and if you don't have medicine, apply on it, as much as the beginning of the gum, cotton wool, and change it twice a day until it is healthy;
For you don't need other medicines in many treatments when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not become connected to the main members, then it is good that you soften the wool with oil of hot temperature, or with rose oil, and put it between the shoulders, and detach from the armpits;
and if there is pain or inflammation in the belly, and it often happens, then they are given a cluster of black wine, and also if the inflammation reaches the intestines;
and it pierces within, and it is known that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is injured, and it is because of the abundance of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the closeness of its nature to the kidneys.
And if the serum from the wound is healthy, then it puts it back as it is, like the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turns towards yellow or black, then you must take out the part that has turned black, so that the decay of blood does not come, for there are veins and arteries there;
then cut what is between the groin, and put the two bones hanging from the part below the wound until the end to alleviate the extraction when the serum flows, and the wound swells.
of the treatment of the swelling
When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some cases, because I have seen that a man was wounded or pierced through the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right of the stomach, and became swollen and formed a fistula, and thus issued the digestion and the gas;
I applied a treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to apply subtle remedies until he was healthy, and the limbs were sound.
And when I saw him whole, I doubted that the sickness was not bad in his belly; and he had no point of pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in a certain manner: Take the ends of the large wounds, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the wound has covered the mouth, if you put it on the two lips, so that it constricts its mouth shut;
and then sew the head, and hold it so that it cannot come undone, then put another suture after in the same manner as before, until the wound is all stitched; and cut the wound.
This head sticks in the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner:
Take the head of this thread of intestine that is very clean, and then tie to the head of this thread a subtle twisted flax thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and return it to its route;
and this manner of treatment of fevers is not further than according to the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the intestinal grazes, there is neither art nor health, except for subtlety.
of a fistula or whatever it may be It is known that every wound or abscess, when it suppurates, is universally called "fistula", and especially when it is hollow and has a cavity.
And a fistula is according to true nodulation a hard and white tumor, where one does not feel pain, and it is as hollow as the feather of a bird;
and sometimes its cavity is clear and empty, and other times it is thick; sometimes small, and other times quite large;
and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed, and it does not close, this is not except by one of the VIII causes: it is to know, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its malice; or because it has hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or it has too much swelling; or the limb is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good for the cure; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the property in the region has slow digestion, and delayed health, and is weakened by nature; or it has veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the symptoms, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
It is suitable that I make you know the treatment of fistula which is made by work of hands.
Know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the kidneys, or to the spleen, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar things.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous sanitation, and there is no lack of labor, and ignorance;
and if it has any fistula that does not come near the place I mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure, and you examine it, take a probe of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, if you seek;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of fluff, because the fluff will fold around the twist;
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well examine it with probes, then cleanse it through one of the openings, for the moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses;
then examine it gently with your finger, to see if there is bone or nerve, and if it is deeply seated, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press, and the place where they feel it;
and when you truly know the limb where it is, and if it is lacking in joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the limbs that I have told you, then cauterize according to what I have told you, and remove the faulty and corrupted flesh that is within;
and then the cure as long as it is healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated straight through, then you should cauterize deeply as much as you can, then I put moist tents with sharp medicine, and push them up to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous flesh that remains within;
and then I put ointments of healthy oil and fat, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy with that, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
If a vein or sinew does not hinder or harm the main limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, then remove it as much as the decay is entire, then treat with cauterizing iron as long as it is unhealthy;
and if it is not healthy, and the wound remains as before, know that you are not a good doctor unless you proceed to cauterize;
if it is uncovered and seek as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the limb;
and if it is thus healthy, it is good. If this is not so, know that the decay is too deep, that you cannot reach it; if there is no other remedy than to let Nature take its course;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with forceps, then extract it with an instrument suitable for that purpose, and if there are many bones, then pull out the third, not leaving one behind;
and if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cauterize and moisturize and heat, and release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then put on the wound a warm poultice of decayed matter, and let it stay until the limbs are decayed around the bones, and then they will release the bones more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg, then only remove the decayed matter until the blackness is all that remains of the bone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of corrupted flesh, and it comes near to the marrow of the bone; then it is necessary to cut and cauterize near the corrupted area, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the humors came to the leg, and it became inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no reason to bleed by opening a vein.
but the physicians in their foolishness opened so much that the abscesses burst open, and they ran out a lot of humors, and it became fistulous, and there came a lot of holes through which flowed both bowel and body moisture;
and many physicians treated the cure for two years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands, so that I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what was flowing through the holes from the large body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color.
I pushed a probe into one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations, and found that one vein came against the other from all parts of the leg.
I then hastened, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption went right to the bone within;
I washed what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except for that which I had removed;
and began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not suture;
and then began again, and found the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, and washed it, and then removed it, and prepared to suture the limb; but I could not put my hand inside a palm of the bone, and pulled it back with all its strength, then restored it with medicines; and it was healed and quickly, and no longer needed to repeat the work because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For with the evacuation of blood often, but it was entirely healed, and a hard callus formed on the bone, and was of good disposition and had no discomfort or harm from all of this, neither in eating nor in coming.
And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: Take the bandage, and bind at the head of the bone that is broken, and instruct him to hold it up high; and put another bandage on the thigh thicker than the first one, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone, and stretch the skin, so that you draw the corrupt flesh to the bottom, and discover the flesh on the place where you see the sore, so that the sore does not touch the flesh.
and put a wad or a bundle under the bone to support the corrupt flesh;
and it is necessary then to sit as one can see and feel the corruption, and to sit again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the flesh entirely;
then put a wad underneath, and then sit from one part to the other with the corruption, and let the sitting be as long as the corruption is, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and be the bone or it contains from the other part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut;
and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand, or the knuckle of the foot, it is a very strong thing, but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire into this corrosion, as it appears to you; and clean it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or the nerve do not make a countercondition;
and know that the incision and the bones to be cut are many, according to the size of the bones and the appearance of the holes, and their thickness and thinness, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, it is necessary to prepare each instrument for its similar work;
and be aware that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of the diseases; if you prepare the instrument that you need according to what is necessary for it.
The head may dislocate either from an internal cause or from a cauterization by fire;
and when you have applied medicine to that corrosion through the treatment of medicines, and they are not beneficial, then it is necessary to amputate that member up to where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes either by death or by wickedness, which is greater, from the defect of the member;
and the signs are that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire, and after the blackness, there comes a corruption of member to member, and it takes over the whole body;
If you are bitten by a serpent, and it is by the venom of certain beasts, such as the scorpion of the sea and viper and similar things, if the corrosion is in the head of the pain, then cauterize, and do not give respite to come near the hand.
And if it comes near the hand, then cauterize at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come near the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cauterize at the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy or ointment that is worth the quantity of its virtue;
and all this is done when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cauterize after the next joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then cauterize the entire foot; and if it goes up into the leg, cut at the joint of the knee;
and if it comes from above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to leave the patient to death;
and the way to cut or saw the limb is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one of the assistants downwards, and another assistant upwards, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments with a spatula as wide as possible, until the bone is exposed;
then cut or saw, and put on each part a dressing of linen, so that the saw does not touch the healthy flesh, and comes to the patient another lesion and a new abscess.
And if a flow of blood comes when you make an incision, then cauterize the flesh immediately, or put on some constricting powders;
then return to your medicine until it is accomplished, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healthy;
and I will tell you what happened to the man in his dream:
he had a blackness that seemed to be a burning of fire, and this corrosion first came into his right foot, until it took over the entire foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to amputate the foot, and was cured;
and long after that the corruption returned to the right hand, and he came to me, and I applied things which rebound after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosions;
and he wanted me to amputate his hand, but I refused, because I had hope of counteracting the matter; and feared that if he cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the arm was weak;
and he despaired of it, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed;
and I have not seen that this has been done before except for those who are in the profession.
Sometimes an abscess comes to the flesh and remains so long that it makes a large collection of pus; and then it breaks and bursts, and the pus spills out, and leaves the flesh pale, like a useless vessel; and the skin that is underneath is as thin as delicate cloth, and does not adhere to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called " eczema", and is not called "fistula";
but if it is so enlarged that it comes just to the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin is so that you should cut around the entire wound, and likewise when it is subtle, like a delicate cloth; and does not hinder because of its corruption.
And if you think that the skin will hinder, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then heal it by applying a poultice:
look if the abscesses are large, and the bowel that is in it is of foul odor, then make a poultice of Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take vitriol, and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and put the mixture in a vessel on the fire, until the medicine becomes red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take from that according to necessity, and make it into a poultice and in the middle, and inject it into the bottom, and hold the perineum; and let the medicine be in for 2 hours, then extract it while squeezing;
do this many times, until the chest is relieved, and the pus is thrown out;
and sometimes an injection of hot ashes is made, when this medicine is not available, and it is that you take ashes from the trunk of a vine, and throw hot water on them, then filter it, and inject it, until you know that the chest is well cleaned;
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the hot ashes, then inject a mixture of hot and mild where there is a bit of powdered litharge; You should clarify with honey and wine mixture, that the honeys have properties of purifying and washing, and the wines make the blood more acidic;
and when you have done this, and you have ensured that the blood is well purified, then clarify with what makes charcoal appear in it, and you take a plaster made of diafoun powder, and make it with rose oil and wine;
or you clarify with certain medications and oils, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of the oils;
and if the hole of the abscess is small, and the cane of the syringe cannot enter, then widen it with a needle a little, and put in a piece of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, until it is widened;
and if the wound is too large, then sew it and leave only as much room as the syringe can enter, and if the hole that the pus comes from is above, then cut below where it is.
and if you cannot cover the belly as you wish, arrange it in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place it is, for when the bowel is deep, do not let it protrude outward and if you cannot cover the belly as you wish, arrange it in such a manner: that the bowel will run lightly downward, and do not let anything of the bowel;
that the bowel will run lightly downward, and do not let anything of the bowel; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and apply a bandage of linen that covers the whole wound; then cover the forces of the wound with a plaster, and make a hole in it one finger wider than before, then apply ointment gently on another bandage according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the belly to alleviate the bowel, and do not remove the large bandage outside except after several days once;
and he who is on the perforated wound of the breast, often throws up to expel the pus, and knows what comes out of the pus, if it is venom or a pouce or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in a certain manner and you see the nature that rises from the wound of the sore, then know that the wounds are healing, and approach the health;
and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, if change the other dressing, and renew the application.
And if subtle poisons cut after long tension, do not despair of the health, for health is approaching.
For there are men whose tardiness in removing the blackness from their wounds, and of those that do the opposite;
and if his bowels are not digesting well after many days, know that the breasts are not making it better;
and if the breasts are slow to make it better, and it is delayed, then apply dry medicines, moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diafoint ointment, for there is a large portion of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
Take diafoint ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of equal vintage wine in substance;
then prepare the confection and put it to use;
and this same mixture makes a sweet cooked fat, when diafoint ointment is not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and pound it, and powder it on the honey while it is over the fire;
and then in glue I spread, and apply it to the breast, and sometimes I administer an aristologist's draught, and roots of lis celestial, which is as fine as flour of vetches and centaury; and in use of simples or of composites: grind them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I mentioned, and in use;
and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the ligaments; if the treatment for a fistula, as we have said before.
Panaritium is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the thumb or hand, or foot, or by accident arises in other fingers;
and when it is inflamed, and no care is taken, then the abscess comes, and it runs and discharges pus as long as it runs to the root of the fingernail, and by chance it discharges entirely;
and the corrosion reaches to the bone, as long as a painful and foul-smelling ulcer appears, and the head is swollen with widespread pain, and its color turns putrid.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment is of no benefit, then it is necessary that you cut off all the surplus flesh that remains from the fingernail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cautery is of great aid if the bone is sound, and the fingernail is healthy;
and if the fingernail presses on the flesh, and causes it to swell, and become black, then it is necessary that you put something under the fingernail to raise the flesh, and push it upwards, and cut away the dead flesh subtly and lightly, and apply to the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then heal the joints as long as they are healthy.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, chop it off, and apply force, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
and if you see the decayed part, cut it off in the same way as it was said before, then heal it as long as it is healthy;
and if it is swollen, and bruised, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary that you should heal it first;
then cut the sharp and pointed thorn of the splinter, cutting across, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh which is beneath the nail, because the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on it to calm it.
The two bones that grow in the hands of certain men by accident are all cartilaginous, and by accident they have a ligament or they have bones, and sometimes they have an angle, and none of them grow from the root of the joint, where the growth is in certain nodes of the fingers.
Those that grow on one knuckle of the finger do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the finger, by accident, do move;
the size of the one that is cartilaginous is light, in a ligament manner: Size it at its root with a wide spatulum.
Those that grow at the root of the joint are painful to cure: it holds onto the flesh.
In the one that grows on the last knuckle of the finger, it is necessary that you cut first the flesh round about to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for that, then cure it until it is healthy.
The sudden pain that comes to both sides together comes from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn of fire, or from similar things.
If it is necessary that you treat the sudden pain, then you must repair it according to its natural forms. then put between two moist cloths or towels soaked in oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two subtle pieces of cloth, as long as the member is swollen, if it is necessary.
If sudden pain comes to one of its sides with the palm, then treat that sudden pain as it is necessary.
Ulcers are thick veined wounds full of melancholic superfluities that come in many members of the body;
and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry burdens, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the bile, and then the blood of the basilisk.
The treatment with iron is in two ways: One is where they cup, and pull out the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein, and pull it all out.
The cutting is in this manner: raise the leg of the patient who is very cold and weak, as much as the thick blood becomes subtle, then pull the leg of the sick from the knee to the hip joint up to the part below the groin;
then cup the vein in one place, or in two or in three, with a large cut, then elevate and pull out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can suffer;
and then the physician instructs him to anoint himself with black tar and meat juice;
and recommends evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and is harmful to the patient.
The elevations of it are in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if it has many hairs, then shave or wash them, and rub the leg with warm water until it becomes red, and the veins become swollen;
and if you have no bath, heat it by the fire, and then apply it directly to the vein of the loin at the head of the groin, or on the part below the thigh;
then open the skin at the loin, and scratch the vein from each part, as much as it appears when one feels it;
and then it becomes red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems also like a white cord;
then cut the razor to the bone, as long as it is raised from the skin, and then anoint it with a light ointment, then cut it on the other side with three fingers;
then scratch the skin on the vein as much as it appears, then raise it with the razor, as you have done, and anoint it with another ointment, as you have done before;
then cut another incision, or several if you are skilled in the trade, then raise it, and cut to the bottom of the foot, then draw and raise it up to the second incision;
then pull it out from incision to incision, as long as it goes freely, then cut it;
and if you cannot draw and raise it, then put a strong double thread on the needle, and raise and draw it, and cut underneath the bone, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as long as it will go; and guard that she does not fall, for if she falls, one cannot treat or lift her, and it comes to harm the patient;
and when you have treated it all, put on the place of the wound a moistened linen cloth in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healthy.
And if the eyelid is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously said.
The shape of the iron with which one treats the eyelid is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not injure the vein;
and is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would injure the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein is obstructed in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs nor trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it grows in another part than the legs, and this comes from the decay that rises from under the skin, as it does within the body of snakes and worms, obstructed between skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that there comes on the leg a great inflammation, then the limbs change, and the vein starts to come out, just like the root of a plant.
When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plaster one and a half inches thick, and the knot, and leave the plaster on the leg, and all the times that it is necessary to remove it, then wrap around the plaster and the knot;
and if it is too long, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely removed; for if you cut it, then it grows back into the flesh, and causes abscess and rot in the limb, and a very bad disease;
because of which thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body;
and it happens sometimes with this vein when it is treated with 5 or 6 fingers of length, and a vessel comes to me, from which it issues 6 fingers of length, and when you cut it, then the artery protrudes or bursts, and pierces all the way through, so that everything comes out;
and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and apply to the limb medications that promote putrefaction for no day, then cure it as with abscesses.
And often at this vein there are many pains, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and a lot of pus comes out, and from which the pain decreases;
Cure the ills then as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh This illness is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects the cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body rising and descending, and is felt well when it moves from member to member, until it breaks through the skin where it appears, and falls out;
and is caused by purulence of certain humors, such as come worms and snakes and earthworms and intestinal worms in the belly;
and one doubts its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it cured and treated, one cannot be certain that when it will heal:
it is necessary then that you tie the limb above and below with a strong string tightly, then cut above and treat the wound, and if the vein is deep in the flesh, and you do not touch it, cauterize it with fire, until it dies;
and the greater harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near to the eye, hold back from him the eyebrow forcefully, then cut above, and treat the wound;
and it is necessary to use on the patient a treatment of purging of the body with solutive medicines for the bad and putrid humors, and beware of eating putrid and corrupting foods.
of the pain which comes from windiness This illness is called in our land "vapour", and is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member;
and I have seen what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and a little after, I saw it move up as if a worm to the shoulder, swifter than anything, like living silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and fixes in the shoulder, and then a little after runs throughout the whole body, until it comes into the other arm;
then she told me that it would turn back inside the body, as I had seen it.
I was very surprised at how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. However, I had seen many times that they moved well from one painful place to another, but I had not seen it in this way, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and uncovered veins, and for this reason the aforementioned constriction appeared;
and it did not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and full veins.
And when you cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said, if the joint is lifted up and down repeatedly, and then cut into it so that the aforementioned constriction at the place of the vein is forced out; and cauterize the limb;
and if you do not see with your eyes, then treat what troubles the intestines, such as foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpent, and similar others.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the limbs of the body where they are found.
The diversity of them is that there are some which have large heads, and small ones, and barbed, and jagged; and of those that have two edges, and of those that have handles, and of those where there are fragments;
and the one that falls in no member falls according to two methods: or in principal members it falls, such as brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then on any of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appears: if it happens that you warn them of the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases; and when there is a bad sign that does not appear to me, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and the thread that is on the brain, is when there is a split and a rupture and a turning away and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perverting of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it is without force to the nostrils, or to the ears; and by chance it affects the speech and the voice; and from the wound comes a white discharge resembling pus, and also a foul-smelling flux like that of flesh;
and this is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls or passes, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it was stuck in a hard thing, not at all empty; and by chance the arrow moves like the pus, and cuts out black blood, and brings on coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: the wounds then are without doubt a sign that death is approaching.
And the sign of the arrow that strikes the arm is that without great pain, a discharge comes out from the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrowhead is lodged in the covering of the foot, it is painful for the little toes; and causes great suffering and pain and shortness of breath; and moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrowhead is lodged in the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the flesh.
And if the arrowhead is lodged in the belly, and it perforates the intestine with a hole through the gut, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead is lodged in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels a strong pain: it is known that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happens to me, for that which you must do otherwise.
It happens to the man that an arrowhead remains in the arm at the root of the nail: I pulled it out, and pulled it from another part below the fat of the ear, and it was healthy without any mess.
And pulled from one wound an arrow that the fat of the eye had underneath the skin underneath, and the arrow was embedded, and could not be felt except the point towards the trunk, and it was a large arrow of a Turkish bow, with the iron rod without barbs;
The play was over, and no evil accident came to him.
And pulled an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with barbs:
I will shave the beard, and I will make it subtle as I do the trick, and the Christians will be healthy.
And I pulled an arrow from the man, which had entered his belly, and thought he was dying;
and since thirty days had passed, his condition had not changed; I cut around the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out strongly, and there was no bad accident.
And I saw the man to whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was swollen above;
and the arrow remained inside him, and his natural functions were not changed, nor did I find any damage in any of his natural organs.
And I saw another man, into whom an arrow had fallen into his face, and the wound was swollen; and therefore remains thus suffering great pain;
and many other similar things.
And he pulled an arrow from the hand of the prince, the king, which had been shot in behind his knee, and was somewhat leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely embedded.
I was called to the cure after it had been shot for three days. I found the wound very constricted.
I felt it with a subtle touch, and could not feel it; and he felt a piercing and pain under his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow, I put on the place an emplaster made with attractives and digestives, because the limbs did not swell; and the limb appeared to me to be that of the arrow.
and the limb appeared to me to be that of the arrow. I put the plaster on the wound, and treated the injured limb, and it remained there for a long time, until the arrowhead was felt inside his body;
and it pressed against his bladder. I put on the wound caustic corrosive medicine for a long time, until it was covered, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which had adhered to the flesh;
then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that caustic medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it exceeded the limits within four months, and then I cleared the wound so that I joined the tendons, and the muscles on one side and the other, but could not exit;
then I did not cease to refine and engineer devices, until I took the arrow with the tendons well made, according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, so that I extracted it, and restored the wound.
And the surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was entirely cured.
I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you should base your treatment on what I say, for books cannot grasp everything;
but wise masters understand well only a little of what is said, and on what is present and deficient, they find new work, and new instruments, in the discernment of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs or are fixed unless it is according to two methods: or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and that which shoots forth where it enters, is an arrow entering into fleshy parts, and shoots forth from them sometimes.
And if it does not heal now, then let it be until the flesh is putrid around it, and the pus is alleviated.
and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot come out, then let it be for some days, and move it each day;
and then it will heal, and if it does not heal, then pierce around it with a subtle instrument, until the tissue around it is enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrowhead is lodged in the limb of the body so that one cannot see it, then search for it everywhere; and if you feel it, then pull it out with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then push it in so that the wound is large;
and pull the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow that it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck between the two parts of the bow that you hold, and then break or crush the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it;
and be subtle so that you do not break the arrow, that you pull it more gently.
And if you cannot at once, then leave it until the surrounding flesh is purified, then pull it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood makes you contradict, then remember what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and of the vein, and advise how you can pull the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently;
and put the patient in the same position as when the arrow fell, for this is the greatest aid that it should be, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears with something of it, or the skin is swollen in the place if one sees or feels it apparently:
cut then upwards, as long as the tongs can grasp, and then extract: if blood flows now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand around, as long as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction as long as it comes out;
and if the fist of the arrow is in, thrust it to all the fist;
and if the bone is fractured, and you wish to administer a poultice, if you administer the instrument gently, then the tip of the arrowhead enters into the flesh of the instrument;
and then apply force, and if the arrow is deeply embedded, then you push the instrument to the point of entry, in order to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it requires.
And if the arrow penetrates the foot or the thigh or the belly or the bladder or the ribcage, and it is protruding, and you can cut around it, then you cut.
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if it is necessary. and the treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the tongs with which one treats the arrowheads are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many methods: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the pointed tool is like the feather of a bird, to prick at the point of the arrow, as here is the shape:
Of the veins from which one bleeds are thirty-one, of which there are sixteen at the head, that is to say: Two vessels which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries which are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the little vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two sinews which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augenherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one usually bleeds are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and lay people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and lay people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side, and the laymen call it "vein of the belly", and it is near the ribcage, and it is the one from which they bleed, which visibly appears on the abdomen.
And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the thumb and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and on the foot there are three veins: one is below the curvature of the left hip, and the second is the saphena which is on the right side of the shin; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is on the shin of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient coughs and migraines;
and the qualities of the blood, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then press the patient's neck to a vice, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two places depending on the head: take the bandages from your back, and where you feel the pulse beneath your back, it is a sign of an abscess;
then take the lancette and push it beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand at all the vein above, and cut and the skin and the vein well, two fingers from the traverse, and make the blood come out as much as you see;
then constrict and bind, until it is healed;
and I have already spoken of the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is useful for migraines, and swelling, and customary ophthalmia, and on the body of the watery eyes;
and the quality of the blood is such as I have said: and it is that the patients strain their neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and they feel the pulse at the bottom of the back, and then they indicate by bending;
then he raises the heart on the vein above at the back of the index finger, and puts the lancet below, and raises the vein above, and cuts it, just as you have done with the other veins, and makes the blood flow according to your need;
then he releases the patient, and puts his back on the vein for an hour, then applies a cotton pad; and then let the abscess form, and leave it until it is healthy;
and we have already spoken of their treatment and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
The bloodletting of the frontal vein is worth as much as the bloodletting of the head for ancient facial diseases, and for migraines, and for redness.
and the quality is such that the disease constricts the neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "incisor", of which this is the form:
And put the point on the vein, and strike with the back of your hand, or with another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then untie from the patient the neck, and leave the vein until it is healthy and sometimes open one of the large veins.
In no way does it matter that the flames are too sharp; and the vein is pierced through, because the bone is near, and by chance the flame breaks when it is subtle.
The veins of the two arms that are in the two shoulders help with the eyes, and the forehead, and the redness, and the hearing in the ear, and the ailments of the face;
and the quality of their vein is that the patients stretch their neck while turning some ligament, as before;
then the vein, and let the vein be pierced through, a little bit long from the flame a little wide, because it does not have a point to burn. And if the flame is subtle, by chance it breaks;
then make an incision of blood, as much as you are able in your profession, and then bind on the wound, and bind it well.
The blood of the vein that is born from the ankle is good for pain, and for hidden sores, and for face diseases, such as emigraine and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old;
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient should pull their neck, then pull their ankle with their left hand, and take the subtle flame long, and insert it between the lip in the space which is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well by itself, and the blood will start to flow now;
and do not let it bleed too deeply, and make the blood flow according to its need, then leave it for a night, because it is very hot when restored;
The blood of the two elbows helps with the narrowing of the thigh, and with the beginning of paralysis, and with many diseases, and with petechia, and with corrosions, and with herpes, and with eczema;
and the quality of the sore is such that the patient stretches his neck to one side and the other, as we have said;
and let the masters be at the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat, then let the vein of the elbow be cut somewhat broadly, then let the blood flow moderately, or as much as necessary;
then perform the same on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and hold the middle veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so that the wound is clean.
of the sore of the liver The sores of the veins of the lips above are identified by a collar in the mouth, and a corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and pain of teeth and inside.
And the quality of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins:
cut then one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each side, and also make it the same for the veins that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
of the blood below the tongue The blood of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the blood of the head, and it is for the tightening of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and looks down at each corner to see a black vein:
Feel then one and the other, and do not press too deeply in, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that one feels commonly are felt in two ways:
or by pricking to the whole flamed meridian, or subtly olive-like as when the veins are being cut, and it is called "aneuil"; and they are large and subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The form of the flamed meridian is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
And it has the task of opening the superficial veins with a large amount of visible blood, and which contain a lot of blood and muddiness; and it is the form of the flame of olive oil
and it is more subtle and pointed, and is for purging the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
The purging of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are in the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
and it is necessary for the purger to purge wisely, and that he beware of the artery that is above. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one should not press the flame, but cut with a cauterizing iron.
And if the basilica vein does not appear manifestly, then it is necessary that you dissect it, and change to another; Or you want some vein of his, or you will find in his arm the vein with blood. It appears manifestly; and the blow to the weak ankle, as we have said.
And if you know the location of the vein, then it is necessary that you stretch the arm, so that you touch the spot as soon as you feel the pulse; then bend the joint of the elbow, and then lift the arm, and strike the vein of the weak ankle; and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the swollen spot, for it is near the artery: beware of the gift.
And if you see it protruding high up like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood of the artery: Hurry then, and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if it is without strain, which often happens; Raise the arm, and let it be, and do not move the patient's;
and let it be on a poultice, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if it is without strain, and it does not help, and the medicine is not prescribed for you, then cut the artery that is open, because the head of the treatment; and strains the joint.
And take a splint of fistula, and bind it, and take one of the parts and place it well next to the other joint;
If the joint is strained, it's good; if not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that constrict blood;
and the stitches are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the positioning of the string of the arm.
The blood of the vein in the middle helps since it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon that he be warned by the nerve which is beneath, and if he cuts too deeply, and he touches the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the wound becomes grievous, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in any man because of its subtlety, then it is necessary that you know the sinews of the instrument; and avoid the nerve with your hand.
And if it has a vein between the two nerves, thus the wound is very long.
The bloodletting of the head helps, which draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed at the olive vein or at the martian vein, for it is the safest of all veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery. However, it is necessary to seek the lightest vein, and not to harm anything if one fails the first time, and then try again; and by chance one will find a good vein for some men, when one fails the first time, but it does not harm anything.
The quality of the bloodletting is according to one's thought.
The first thing that you must know about bloodletting is that bloodletting is not done except to preserve health and to avoid impending illnesses;
and let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are on the elbow: these are to know, the cephalic, the middle, and the basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in April after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three times a day.
The bloodletting that is administered for illnesses has no determined hour, but rather when need is of day or night, at all hours and in every tension;
and it is not advisable to bleed children up to thirteen years, nor a woman carrying fruit for more than four months up to seven. Nor should the old who have passed sixty years be bled.
And when some want to purge themselves, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that they empty the intestines of a light cluster, if it has many retained filths, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful dung from the principal members.
Nor does it purify one who is too full of meats, nor one who is drunk, as long as he is full of it, nor the dropsical;
and let one beware of purging after a colic passion, and vomiting, and deterioration of the stomach, and multiplying of the womb in women, and from travail, from vigil, and from fasting, and that which is all virtue, or through a thing of the arm or of the body;
then refine the humors, if they are not coarse, through meats and through beverages and through medicines, so that you have them in a subtle power;
Then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly let the blood flow, and this blood is from the vein that runs between the thigh and the third, as we have said;
and guard yourself during the day from effort, and from excess, and from dislocation, and from similar things;
and be joyful and happy, and let the vein that is being bled be higher than the one being bled from, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull the vein upwards, for when it is too narrow or too wide, it cannot be treated;
and then rub the body with the hands, until the veins swell, and feel them;
then anoint the veins with a little warm oil, then put his right hand on the left vein below the body a little where he wishes to bleed, so that the vein does not flee and fail to be pierced.
For there are veins that are as tight as cords in the sausage, and if it is of those that are full of wind, so that when one puts on the flame, it draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is one of these. and if it opens the vein, the wound is too tight, because of which it is necessary that the sausages be advised in these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good; if not, then one begins again a little below that place or above the handle, if the places are not weakened.
And if the places are weakened, and the patient is spitting, let him a day or two, and do not lift the arm: for it will bring on an abscess of the armpit.
Do not enter into a bath, then recommend the sauna if it pleases them;
and if the perforation is small, or the wound cuts subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then make that same perforation to the entire flame directly;
and a little haste in the work, so that the limbs are not weakened; For this happens often, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb weakened, do not recommend the sauna, and put a little oil on it, for it alleviates the body of blood, and is bad in this limb the oil that the oil;
and administer the oil in each sauna where you bathe the veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same thing makes for a triangle and a bump of eyes, when one puts it on the limb; If the blood is subtle and separates when it is too thick.
And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not healthy outside except for the times when the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and put on the wound a wet sponge in water and in vinegar a little warm, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the wound after some hours any blackness or greenness, do not touch it; and if you want, put on a dressing of garlic or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastich, or similar.
And often there occurs an abscess and swelling at the wound of the basilic vein:
put your hand on it, and if you find the flesh soft to the pressure of the hand, then that swelling is bad. Beware then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance in short time without the artery;
but make the plaster dry to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healthy.
And draw from each one blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it be until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is weak and lacking, and needs extraction of blood, that a larger wound be made for him, and that the wounds be wide;
and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him little and often, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking;
And this kind of injury is saved from decay of blood and from damage of the nerve, and is better than the injury of the lung or of the side.
And to one whose body lacks at the injury site, it is good to give soft poultice made with juice of crushed pomegranates; If it is hot, apply three or four times a treatment of blood; And if it is of cold complexion, apply before the injury a soft poultice made with syrup of honeyed musk, or in syrup of aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicories, and well-scented syrup.
And if it throbs at the injury site, after the issue of a lot of blood, it is good that he drink broth of beef, and subtle scented syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to purge his arm, and to bleed another time, then it is necessary, when it is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of its virtue continually.
And he who wants to purge his arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong body, then he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to bleed from another part, then he should bleed on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and causes fever; then it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and to widen the aperture as far as it reaches to the lungs; After you have regarded all the conditions of bleeding, and put your hand on his pulse while he bleeds, so that death does not come into the lung, and this happens many times, when the bleeder is neglectful;
and it is not necessary when you see the arm become dislocated, to make blood come out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly upon; nor if it is curved, that he should extend the arm hastily, for that would be harmful;
but let him alone until it bleeds a second time; or you touch the point of the flame, until the blood that has congealed at the opening of the vein comes out, and put some warm oil on it, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess has subsided.
And if there is a need to draw blood a second time, then let it be from the same limb, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
The vein in the arm is called by the name of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, as long as the vessels are red;
then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the blood is let from the middle, neither from the width nor from the length;
and let the punctures be wide, and let the blood be drawn well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot flow out, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood run into the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in warm water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
and the bleeding of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The salve of the right hand is worth all the medicines for the ills of the liver, and this is the method:
Strain the hand, and soak it in warm water, until the vein becomes swollen, so that one can see it; and if you cut it across, and you cut it from top to bottom, it does not harm anything;
and do not cut too deeply in the flesh, for the nerves are already half stripped of their covering, and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is congealed, and cannot be drained.
And when you have let out as much blood as is necessary, then apply oil to the vein and bind it tightly at once, and make a plaster of each of these.
The salve on the left hand is good for illness of the spleen, and do everything just as I have told you regarding the right hand.
The vein of the spleen is useful for all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the liver, and retention of fluids, and disease of the kidneys, and of the thighs and of the old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its vein is that it draws out the disease from the foot into cold water, and rubs on the vein until it pierces, and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot in come many kidneys;
then bleed where the larger kidney is, or at the ankle, which is most useful.
And if you bleed on the foot, you will be cured of the kidneys that are below, and the vein of traversing as in cupping;
and let the blood flow out.
And if the blood cannot come out, then reset the stone in the urine, and let the vein be well emptied.
And if the first application of the plasters fails, then recommend the second one a little afterwards, for the limbs are salty;
Do not doubt of the nerve, as we have said, and thus make of the spleen of the other foot equally.
The limbs of the sciatic vein are at the fork of the thigh, and its application is worth the pain of the hip, when it is because of hot blood.
And the quality of its application is that the patient should be in a bath, and squeeze four fingers above the fork while twisting, because otherwise the vein does not appear;
and if it appears, then apply the plaster in all the ways that you can, and penetrating through; and it is better that you cut it, for the joint is healthy, and it is much put back into place by hand.
and it is better that you cut it, for the joint is healthy, and it is much put back into place by hand. And if you do not turn it, then press any vein that opens at the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and guard against the nerves;
and make the blood flow as much as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; the knee is now healed.
Wounds are made from horns, or from iron, or from a stick;
and wound is treated in two ways: either by cauterizing and attracting blood, or without cauterizing.
And this wound treatment without cauterization is in two ways: Where it is all fire, or without fire;
and venesection which is done by striking and by extraction of blood if it is done in the 13 parts of the body, of which one is all in sum the head; and the others are in the neck; and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the vein at the bottom of the chin; and the veins of the two shoulders; and the veins on the ankles; and the veins in the two arms; and the veins of the two legs; and the veins of the two calves;
and the venesection does not treat any point of blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one does not become weak, as one does when the blood of a vein is let; and it is not suitable that it be administered, nor to any fire nor sensation of fire, in any illness which comes from excess, as long as the body is empty.
And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to administer an enema, or due to habit, we will give it to them each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and at every tension;
for there are some who, when they have need to be administered an enema, have a heavy head;
and there are those who experience excess and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are those who spit a mouthful of blood, and have a swollen tongue, and vomit blood; and there are those who dream, and see in their sleep blood and pain and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is amidst the month, we command to ventilate after three hours of the day.
The saliva of the nose helps with the bitterness of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary except after the evacuation of all the body.
and this ventilation is in the place of the saliva of the cephalic, and it is not necessary except for those who are of a cold complexion in habit, or who have diarrhea, because that causes them great harm;
and therefore it is not necessary for the old people to use it, nor for those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who often blow their nose, become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the ventilator a little more below due to the doubt of oblivion.
The ventilation in the neck is at the place of the vein and of the jugular and basilic vein, and for this reason it is good for the straining of the foot, and for the fissure of the channel of the forearm, and for the cough, and for the replenishment;
and it is good to cure a bit of swelling, because if it holds too tightly, it injures the bladder or stomach and the heart.
The ventilations of the two ribs of the neck are good for the pains of the head, and for ophthalmia and migraine, and for strangulation, and for the pain of the roots of the teeth, and it is at the place of the vein of the basilic;
and it is good that you instruct the surgeon to press his hand on the spot, so he does not cut the artery, and does not make the blood vessels overflow with blood.
The bad smells from the mouth are equivalent to a disease of the mouth, and to a rotting of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the healing of the sores of the two lips.
The bad smells of the entrails are equivalent to a disease that comes from heat and from fullness.
The bad smells of the body are equivalent to as much as three veins of the arm, because it attracts blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon that he should not make too deep an incision, because the leg is nude of flesh, and knows badly nerves and arteries.
The bad smell that is on the backside is equivalent to hemorrhoids of the foundation, and to similar diseases, and it is necessary that the bad smell be large, and be of blood, so that it has need of being well treated; and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The ulcers of the legs heal openly, for they attract blood from the whole body, and are worth the old pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and bring back the flesh;
and they are in place of two sponges, and of two trunks, and altogether they weaken the body after long use, and bring about a foul discharge in many conditions.
The way to apply the ulcer treatment is that you apply it first gently, and press moderately, and put it hastily, and rub equally, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and the appearance of blood;
then do it firmly, and put back the ulcers, and take heed to the condition of the body, for there are some who have such hot blood, and pure pores: if it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to refine the passage of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to strike the third time;
and when we want to let a little blood and a little, then we suffice with only one time. And if we want much blood, then we repeat often;
and if the blood is thick, then strike deeply, and stop there where it seems that the vein has been pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who has narrow pores, that you apply to the limbs ointments which are aperitive and dissolutive: It is a remedy made from violet oil, or from almond oil, or from the oil of cucumber seeds.
and it is also in ivy, made from oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
And if the superfluity is coarse and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it does not require any oil, but rather to be washed after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
And for one who has a lot of moisture, rosewater is lifted, or myrtle water, and sumach, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities rise with old wine, or with water of sewing, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or with other similar things;
and it is not suitable to apply a poultice of fennel before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours;
and do not sleep after the poulticing, and it is suitable that he should be warmed, when he must be poulticed and when he is poulticed.
And beware of those who have a bilious nature, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; it is suitable that he takes cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuce with vinegar, and similar things; and eat little nuts, and flesh of chestnuts, and moist meats.
and eat little nuts, and flesh of chestnuts, and moist meats. And those who have a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and a little ginger, and a little cinnamon and small birds and pigeons;
and the more it is ventilated, one should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men three or four nutsmeg before or after ventilation, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be refined, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The cuppings that are applied without piercing are those that are applied to the liver, and to the spleen, and to the abdomen, and to the belly and the navel and the loins and the hip, because these members do not suffer from being pierced, and it is not done for fear of attracting blood from member to member, as we place on the breasts when there is an excess of blood;
To treat the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply warm poultices to the stomach and to the navel to soften the limb;
and to treat the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, so treat by its attractive virtue by adventure the obstruction, or remove the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one applies it to the liver and to the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these poultices are administered empty to suck up as much moisture; and sometimes they are administered together with fever, and sometimes plain or with hot water, as in illnesses of the pleura, and in such a way that one fills the poultice with hot and humid water, or with water in which one has cooked suitable herbs.
The form of the poultice administered to the fever is this:
And it has two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and it has on the outer side of the middle a small perforation, as if to put a needle through, and let it be of silk thread, soft in front so that it does not bother the patient when putting it on the limb;
and it has in the middle a crosswise rod of silk or iron, to hold a bandage in place, and they are large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who wear them;
for the ulcers of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from those of the fat.
And one must then put this ulcer on the limb:
take the bandage of wax or the plaster, and put it in the ulcer across the rod that is in the ulcer, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the ulcer so it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the member, and let your fingers be on the orifice that we have spoken of, so that when one wants, if the vapor goes in, and remove the ventouse;
and take the plaster as before, and recommend it often, if you have the skill.
In the ventouse therefore which is administered for disease of the pleura, to all that has no verge or orifice, and is not administered except when it is full of water, and is put on the member as soon as;
and this is the form:
Without them being administered except on members where one cannot put ventouses due to their smallness, such as the lips and cheeks, and similar places; and in bare flesh wounds, such as fingers or nails, and other similar things;
and the quality of the use is such that when you find sweet smooth things in narrow passages, take them.
and put them in a narrow sweet nut, as long as they are familiar, and have nothing in the stomach; and then be cleansed of vein and of intestine, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the things;
and when they are flattened, and will gush out, if it is the liver or one can put intestine, if one puts it, for it is worth much afterwards.
If not, raise the liver of the axle, and then of the narrow passage, very well, and then squeeze it;
and if the liver is too thin afterwards near the body of the things, then wrap it in a linen cloth in a cold narrow passage, and put on, until the thing is strengthened;
and if the blood is multiple, then put on a mixture of vitriol or gall, and similar things, until it is dried;
or put on the limb warm poultices of peeled beans, and let them be there until they adhere to the limb, then it will dry now;
and if you are a master of more skill, then take other bloodlettings.
And if the bloodlettings do not want to take, then rub the limb with fresh blood, or you stick in a needle until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
and when you see that they are falling, then powder on a bit of powdered aloe and ground celery, or cinder, and they will dry now.
Here begins the book of fractures These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for the restoration of fractures and of dislocations.
Know, dear son, that foolish people despise this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor have they learned any letter;
and for this reason the science is foreign in our land, for I have never found any good;
and I know nothing, except for the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the treatments that are needed, as I have done in these two previous chapters before.
It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the discourse and the chapters where the wise man sets his understanding, and stays on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or shaking comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to anoint the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents you from doing so, such as weakness of the body, or infancy, or old age. or if the tension is not very warm, or too cold;
and avoid cold and raw foods, that is to say cold joints, and flesh of goat and of deer, and do not drink wine, and avoid eating fatty and greasy foods, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you are not in doubt of a hot abscess, or of an accumulation of matter in the member;
If the patient returns to his previous bad governance, he will relapse.
And when the broken bone begins to mend, it is necessary that the patient be fed with foods that promote thick nourishment, where he has viscosity, such as roasted pork and bacon, and fried and boiled meats, and liver and entrails of beasts, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For poor nourishment shows meager and worse the fracture.
And know that the bones of the old and decrepit cannot well mend or reunite according to their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but for a cure, reset the broken bone and the large tendons that are separated and join the member together, so it strengthens as it was before; and he not the whole use of his work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish him with coarse foods, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fractures. For there are fractures that come from a blow, and another from a fall, such as the cut of a quill pen for writing.
For there are fractures that come from a blow, and another from a fall, such as the cut of a quill pen for writing. And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture is all just a small crack.
And each manner has its own engine, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory recalls in its place;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone is by what the joints are twisted, and appears well by swelling, and sounds hollow to the touch of the hand;
and when there is no crookedness in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of fracture;
but he can well have a crookedness, or a fissure, or a small break. It is not necessary that you move the limb, but apply medicines that come next, and then gently extract it now.
And know that the fracture which comes in a joint, and are the two parts disjoined, it is necessary to put them now in an equal place, so that abscesses do not come;
and if hot abscesses come, then let be no movement, until the abscess is calmed;
then put it even to the bone that you can lift gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of the bone is easier than the restorations of the skull or where there are fragments;
then hold tight, as it is necessary afterwards.
And if the bone breaks into pieces, stop the flow of two parts, whether it is the hand or foot, or to your hand if it is small members, or to the cords, or to one cord and to your hand;
and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are disjointed, reset by all means the additions in their places at the joint that you can, and take care that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and adjust well the two parts of the bones according to their proper forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
if the dressing is done properly, and it is not strained too much, nor pressed as those who make them come by their work causing abscess and contraction to the member, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient well that they should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and guard well that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
and guard well that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain; and take care that it is placed straight, so that crookedness does not come when it is restored;
and the quality of a broken member is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and in size and in shape.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers and similar things: it is necessary to envelop them with soft and subtle bandages; and those which are thick, like the thigh and leg:
if it is necessary to envelop with a large and hard linen bandage, because the wide bandages press the whole limb, and constrain equally on all sides, so that there is no unevenness;
then bind it tightly with light bandages, three or four according to the member, and constrain the hand a little on the whole bandage, then go above the fracture and constrain less, than the fracture, then loosen a little the fracture;
and soften the bandage a little and often, as much as you press on the healthy part of the limb, then take another bandage, and turn around again above the broken limb;
then return to the part below the fracture, and constrain moderately, neither too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first bandage above;
Then put between the lips of the wound a swab of linen or cloths, as long as it is all even, then tie all with bandages above, and then put your instruments well made on, if there isn't an abscess or swelling.
And if there is a swelling or an abscess, then put on it something that appeases the abscess with heat, and which reduces the swelling, and leaves some days passing;
then strip your instruments, and let them be of the humidity of a large cane wisely, or of wood from which one makes the cleavers, or of branches of palm, and be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the instrument which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and be as long as it is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large; Then hold steady on the stables as you did in the first treatise, then tie a thread underneath, as in the first treatise on the fracture; the more constricted it is underneath, the less there is;
and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of flax or linen;
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish men who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, and it is a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that it has between each staple less than two fingers of space.
And if the patient is troubled by the edges of the stables after the constriction on their healthy limbs, then put underneath them a dressing of flax or linen cloth, so that it does not chafe.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the chest is broken, I will tell you about the treatment afterwards.
And know that it does not matter to stretch these broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it does not matter to put these splints for five days or seven, or more according to the severity of the abscess and the healing that follows.
and see here the method of ancient splints for restoring fractures, dislocations, and sprains:
and it is that you take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and knead it with a little water, and put this paste, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of plaster for restoring fractures in many dispositions, and also for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster for restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the sprain: Take barberry and ladanum and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and mastic, a dram of each; myrrh and aloe, a half dram of each; of electuary eight drams; and make into powder, and mix with the white of egg; if the temperament of the man is cold, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores the broken bones, and is beneficial to many men.
Another method of plaster that is good for sprains: Take mastic and viscammum, a dram of each; myrrh and aloe, eight drams of each; of acacia six drams; Boil Armenian terrapin, and crush well, and mix with water or broth of beef.
Another way to treat joints and bones dislocated from their places, and alleviate the overriding pain, and the fracture of the bone, and the bruising. Take a new linen cloth, and the marrow in oil and cooked, and put on the body.
These plasters do not restore the limb, but they are good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly easing the pains.
Another way to treat fractures that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves, and earthworm leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to treat the fracture of the bone and to alleviate the pain of the abscess. Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of peas, of each one part;
and pound, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are swollen, mix it with water of moist coriander or with water, and use it.
Another kind of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of violets, and seeds of flax, balustre, melilot, and sanzuc, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and pound, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb anything to restore it except for cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says that it should be between two things not too soft nor too hard.
And it seems reasonable to apply to the broken limb, for restoration, warm and slightly hot things, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of applying a plaster that is good for injury and pain: Take mugwort and roots of hemlock, or feathers of birds, and viminal and equal quantities, and crush them, and make a plaster with the mixture.
And then dissolve it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone of their body damaged; if it does not dissolve by itself in a short time. And if pain comes to the body, or swelling, without rest or relief, then hasten, and dissolve it, and remove the plaster immediately;
Take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip it in water, and lift the limb up, until the itching stops, and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply to it a dry, moistened with water or rose oil, linen cloth, and tie it on with a nut, until you are sure of a warm abscess;
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be eased, then apply a subtle plaster, and a little poultice, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and apply subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that the warm abscess and redness and pain and swelling are all gone, and you have applied a poultice and a bandage, then reapply it, just as you did previously.
And if it does not come to the limb any of what we have said, do not force the dislocation further after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture becomes solid and the adjustment of the flesh closes in;
then restrain it more than at first, and bind its vein, as I have said before;
and if you see the limb drying out more than necessary, know that it cannot be restored; raise then the cold water bath, every time you dislocate it, and let it be so for three days, and loosen a little the ligature;
by this work then cut the dead flesh from the limb, and straighten what the foolish surgeons do, who twist the member awry;
It is harmful, and such operations are to be feared, and I do not see anything other than giving pain and operating wrongly.
Many kinds of fractures exist, and there are various shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the collarbone breaks the bone near the shoulder which is separated from the bone, as if done with an axe or club; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "ax-blow" or "hewing".
When the sword cuts through the bone from the underside, and it is called this kind of fracture "cut-off" or "severance".
and the wound from these two fractures is great or small.
And if it has a sunken-in strike, or crack or blow to the head, or fall onto stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a piercing wound, which approaches just to the web that is beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this is a wound whether large or small.
And if there is a wound that has grown into the bone as subtle as a straw, and the split is small, and for this reason it is called this breakage "capillary".
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or a similar thing, and it makes the piece of bone go in, and the bones are split as the blacksmiths do when they strike on the anvils; if between the stones within.
And this especially happens to those who have moist heads or bones, such as a child's head;
and it happens in all these ways of breakage that small pieces are separated as these; and I will speak about its place.
And we recognize all kinds of fractures by the extraction from them, and the inquiry with tongs, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The hair-like similarity is known by that which when one discovers the bone, and rubs against it, if the black fracture appears.
In the cure of the fracture, beware of accidents from the disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and tension, and palpitations, and sharp fever, and the eyes becoming disordered and red, and other similar things in various conditions, then one cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a frightful accident, and you hope for health, then begin the cure.
And when the wound comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to expose the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in this state, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, likewise that the torn part of the bone is corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you suture the fractured part thus:
and it is that you hold the head of the injured patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if a discharge of blood comes to uncover the bone, or a abscess breaks, use what aid is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with moistened cloths in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the broken abscess is appeased, and be assured of the discharge of blood; Then the treatment begins with the bone to the vein, and it is done according to two methods of work:
One method is that you cut at the narrow incision in front, and it is the shape:
And then you make another incision larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have a number of diverse incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron.
and in working lightly, so you do not injure the head.
And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary that you pierce through it, in such a way that you make incisions with cauterization tools, not too deep so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the head, and should have near the point a margin or a circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
and it is necessary to have many, so that each one comes into their place of the spine, so that you have supporters for all tests;
and this is the form of the three manners of supporters:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one supporter on the bone, and turn to your two hands as long as you know that the bone is pierced;
then put the supporter on another part a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with incisions the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, pincers;
and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the spleen.
And when you have pierced the bone, and drawn, it is necessary that you make the instrument that remains of the bone to all other similar instruments like an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and more subtle than the other incisors;
and if there remains nothing of the small bones, or any shells, then lightly touch the bones to one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tenderness and caution that we have spoken of.
And another manner of work is what the Gauls call, which is safer; and it holds very strongly, and this is its property. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where it is broken or separated, so that when you have discovered that part, then put on the head of this lancet-shaped instrument, whose form is this:
And do not cut from one side, and the affected part is in two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then strike with a small hammer from above, so that you gently cut the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane that is beneath;
if it adheres to the bone, gently lift it, for one lifts it well without harm, and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut just above, and it has small pieces, then it is necessary to render that asperity, and to remove the scales with a subtle rasp which you must have in various quantities, to apply on each part the most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Start with large rasps, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other haircuts and subtle breakages, it is necessary that you make adjustments according to their growth.
and it's something that isn't easily answered by one who has studied this art.
And if the wound is deep, then you should take a piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled piece of linen in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first piece of linen; and do this as gently as you can, so that you don't hurt the wound, then apply another linen on top, and don't strain it more than necessary to touch the wound;
and let it be this way for a day or two, until the aposteme's heat is alleviated, then undo it, and apply medicines such as roots of lily, and powder of vetches, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things;
and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer at the same time medicines without causing numbness;
and beware that the wound is immediately clean, so you do not let in the inflammation, nor let it suppurate, for when pus assembles on the cloth of the brain, it corrupts and decays, and brings to the patient great evil;
for when one puts on the sore a caustic thing, it becomes worse by above. Take heed then, that no evil accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if black discharge does not come forth by the medicine that one has applied, which virtue it has, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one thread, and put it on the sore; then for the cure of manners of cures it is suitable, as long as he is healthy.
It is known that sometimes the two parts of the knee are broken, where one part alone is broken, because there are two bones;
and that joint is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it becomes swollen or twisted, and then becomes diseased.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is suitable that you apply your little bandage or plaster of the knee, and put equal to that break inside your bandage, and in the pouch by default, until the knee regains its natural shape; and do it lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the knee, and the joint cannot come to its place, it is suitable that you put it even at the head of a stick a little thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, make another one similar, and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscessed ulcers are appeased, then bandage the head of the knee with tendons of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bandage the other part, where the fracture is; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the holes of the knee.
And direct someone to moisten the tendons in butter, and move each joint. It does not seem to me that this is good, but rather that they should be moistened with a concoction of egg and powder of mallow. then let the tendon alone, until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes the swelling pushes out the eyes from their orbits, and if the bandage is too tight inside, and it holds the fracture, and the patient breathes with difficulty; Or make a hole so that you see.
And if abscesses come to the eyes while you are operating, then put cotton moistened with rose oil, or in a pouch of theriac.
And if the abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster made from flour of cypress, and powder of incense, mixed with water of roses, then put on light poultices, and do not tie around the eyes;
and if the fracture of the eyes is small, and it breaks into tiny pieces, then extract the suitable fragments from that, then sew the crack, and the treatment of things that cause black discharge, and swelling, like plasters and ointments suitable for that;
And if it has no thickness of new flesh, then apply the treatment of tents, and put on clean dressings, until it is healthy.
When the jawbone is broken apart, and there is no open wound, and the breakage is only slight, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather fractured within, then one can feel it lightly.
It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the breakage is on the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and gently push the breakage from inside, and hold the other jaw with the other hand from outside, and set it even.
And if the breakage of the jaw is separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you administer extension to the two parts, until they are even.
And if the teeth are shaken or broken, or loose, hold them in place with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the bruised jaw a kerchief, and put on a double bandage. And put on the bandage a large steel plate well made, or a piece of leather equally long and wide as the jaw, and tie it to the head that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
And if you see that the fracture is changing, then untie it on the third day, and then reset to its place what has changed; and apply a plaster on it, made from powder of mill with abundant egg white or flour of sage, after you have applied the kerchief;
and put on the plaster a light linen cloth, and if the plasters stick, and the condition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healed; Many times it is healed within three weeks.
And if a hot abscess comes, then apply what we have said many times.
And if it has a fracture and wound together, restore the bare piece of bone in being bone; if subtlety of the fracture shows dubious congealings to that.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with a flame according to necessity.
And when you have bone all these pieces, and none remain, then sew the wound, if it is large, and put on it suitable plasters to that, to bind flesh, until it be healed.
The fracture breaks several times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the breakage is in three ways:
When it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are fragments, and it is more difficult to restore;
where there is a break with a wound.
And the work is such that when the break is without wound, you should have two attendants, so that one holds the injured area where the break has occurred; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part;
then put the break equal with your two hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor displacement.
And if you need to stretch further, then put between the shoulder and the patient a round ball of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the injured area, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you put the break in place as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out of the ditch, because it comes from deep, then it is necessary that the patient put his hand on his hip, and put the medium of the shoulder in the hollow of the ear, and turn the lower part of the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then take the fracture in your hands, and if you pull it straight, it is necessary that you split it apart;
and draw the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any means, then cut it with one of the incisions that you have; but that you put within the shoulder this instrument, to guard the spleen:
and it seems a spoon, and is not too heavy, and should be as wide as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the instrument;
and it has two heads, as you see, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, just like the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the routing is small, or you doubt the abscess is hot, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten the dressing in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and apply it.
The tightening of the bone, when it is without a wound and without a cut, is that you put on the bone the plaster of powdered millstone and of buffalo's urine, and apply light bandages, and put a woolen sponge under the bottom, if you have the skill; Then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then put a double cloth on the stupes, and apply the plaster; Then take a thin stick of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the end of the bandage is hanging; and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and undo the healthy shoulder, and undo the diseased shoulder; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the fractured bone, then check every day, and when the ligaments relax, then restrain it;
and make the patient sit on his back, and put when he sleeps a small pillow under the shoulder, to lift the joint upwards; If the fracture of the clavicle is alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident comes from it, until twenty days;
Then reapply the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and hold it in place and let it be, until it is restored;
and it is most often restored within twenty-eight days, and in less than eight weeks.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder fractures or dislocates and does not stay in place, and is not held except by touching;
If the bandage conforms to the shape of the fracture, and you reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
Then put on the limb powder made from millstone with a little wool, and light compresses, and put on a double bandage; Then put on a broad and subtle stick, a little broader than the shoulder, and if the stick is dislocated it moves in no place of the shoulder, unless one applies that stick with bandages of linen, so that the stick is steady.
and then bind it with a large bandage firmly, so that the stick does not move from its place, and look at the limb each day;
and every time it becomes dislocated, restrain it, and put the stick back in its place, and let the patient lie on their side;
and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number of days is accomplished, then disbandage it, and be careful, for it is not good to keep the splint on too lightly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and forms a point under the heart, then make an incision, and cut the bone, and do what we have said in the case of breaking through the apoplectic abscess with heat.
of the fracture of the foot
The feet are sometimes broken in the middle, but that happens rarely; but it breaks often at the toe.
And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and weakness, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the bowel in the broken bone, and loosens the senses completely.
And the restoration is that the patient often places on their back, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the edges of the two ribs with his hands, and subtly adjusts to put everything in its proper place, as much as you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then put on plasters and dressings above the subtle splint of salt, or other light paste, and wrap it in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the linen round to the back, and hold it tight, and check every hour the liver, and if it breaks, then hold it fast;
and if it is necessary to dissolve, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and dissolve it, and scrape off the plaster, and address that which has come from various methods of treatments;
then reset the plaster, and hold it fast as long as it is healthy.
of the fracture of the ribs
It is known that the fracture of the ribs does not come except from heavy blows to the back, and to the inner chest, and they do not break except because they are brittle; and the bone feels well to the examination by the fingers.
And the restoration is that you make equal the fracture, as it is necessary. And then apply the plaster, and extract a splinter, if you have it in your profession.
And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as from a pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and reaches to the tips of the fingers, and all and vomits great clots of blood, and it is a grievous sickness, and the old men have put great skill.
And if it is one of those who say that it is necessary to administer winds that swell the belly, to push out the fracture from the spleen.
We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come, if it has not come. And if it has come, then let it be soothed.
And some say that one puts poultices on the body, to suck out the humor, and it seems reasonable; In every way, it is doubtful whether the veins attract the excesses to the body due to the disposition of weakness.
And some of them say that one must cover the body with a warm woolen cloth soaked in hot oil, and apply bandages between the ribs to evenly distribute the remedy around, then it will be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of diet and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear by the bone that touches the membrane, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the body of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put a instrument in place to guard the lung;
and then one must cut the bone, and gently pull it back, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters, until it is healed.
And if a posthernia abscess comes, then put on moistened cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the affected area;
and treat meanwhile the area of what is necessary for the abscess, and let the healing scabs form on the affected side where it should, until it is healed.
and also to the spine of the back.
And when it happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take heed if you see their hands made soft and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if the nerves die and feel well when one presses on them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the disease will be cured, if one applies a remedy.
And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take care to see if the feet are soft, and if the injury is in the hands, and on the back there is swelling and unwanted evacuation.
and when one has it above his stomach, then there is unwanted evacuation. And when it is swollen above his back and he wants to sit, then he cannot. Know that it is mortal: then do not labor in its cure.
And if this injury does not come to the veins, then it is a thing of lesser concern.
And the cure is that you should apply if it has a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of muesef of herb, as long as it is applied gently;
Then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
And if any bone dislocates, then it is necessary to apply to the heart; and reset the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat with application of gum, until he is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "head of the elbow", then bend your pouchet with your left hand, and place it even with the other hand on your arm, then put the plaster and the steel on it, if you have the skill;
then pull it tight, and if there is a dislocated bone, put it back in place, and reset it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
It happens that the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it happens, then it does not happen with a small amount of swelling at the head; and it causes pain for a long time, and declines to the worst, and comes to the patient with pain at the leg, and piercing, and swells what is broken.
And the restoration is that you put your hand on it, as long as you are above the fracture; and feel what the breakage and the shape of it are;
and if the breakage is at the head only, then put equal to that breakage, as long as it is in its natural shape.
And if the breakage is for a long time, or it declines inward, then make the patient lie on their belly, as long as the restoration of that breakage appears. And when you have set it even, put on a plaster, then put on a stick of wood or bone, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move;
and apply the plaster to the body below the ribs, until the bandage is even. And instruct the patient that he should sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if a hot abscess comes, do not touch it, until the hot abscess has cooled, and put on what we have previously mentioned; and then return to the restoration, and constrain it as is necessary, if there is no other bad accident;
of the fracture of the shoulder
The joints are that which is between the joint and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
except for one thing, which is to take a smooth club according to this form:
And tie the two ends of the bandages, and throw them over high, and let the patient sit on a seat;
then put his arm broken on the club, until it comes to the joint, and have in the middle a curvature of the club, then throw over some heavy thing where the ministers extend downwards;
then put the physician's hands together equal to the fracture, so that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his shoulder, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one touches what is on the fracture with their hands, and the others touch below everything to the bandage, and each extends to its own part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forced, then hold the bandage below the fracture, and on the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put one bandage below the joint, and the other towards the hollow, below the fracture;
and also if the fracture is towards the hollow, then it is necessary to put a bandage lightly, without pressure, until the fracture is even on the limb, and on the hollow;
then put even the fracture, as it is necessary, and hold it, for if abscesses come, they will not develop.
And if abscesses do come, then do not hold it tight for seven days, and put on a soft cloth and oil of rose, until the abscess is softened;
After the extraction, and the manner of the extraction is such that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm with the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast;
and put the bandage, and bind it to the shoulder, and to the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, unless something would displace it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone will not move, then use splints, and put on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers' width, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers from each side;
then bind to the splints, thus as I have said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, stronger and less constricting.
And if you see the numbness of the limbs, and the constriction, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken member, and you suspect the hot abscess, leave it to heal until the seventh day, as we have said;
Then examine each for three days the ligament, which if it is not inflamed or swollen does not come to the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the member because it is too constricted. If it adheres, as we have said.
And if no such accident occurs, do not force the dislocation further that after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, and have their hands on their stomach;
and put under the shoulder a cushion made of wool equally, and examine each hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken member does not move, nor are the ligaments softened;
If it is received through the virtue of medicine, and the food is given that we have previously placed before them, in such a manner that the food should be at the first subtle; and when it starts to take again, it should be coarse.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken back in 40 days from all; and then one must dislocate and administer baths and medicines of joints for the body to receive.
And if the fracture is bad and swollen, it will take 40 days or 2 months to dislocate.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the two "fleshly" ones, one of which is small, and it is the one that joins the shoulder;
and the other is large, and it is the one that is out of joint, towards the little back;
By chance break the large fragile ligament, or the small one, and by chance it heals together.
When the small fragile ligaments are broken, the restoration is gentle, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more serious than when they are broken and healed together.
If it's the small fragile ligament that is broken alone, then it is necessary to stretch gently, and to put in place.
And if it's the large ligament, then it is necessary to stretch more strongly;
and stretch on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the small fingers be lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross their arms over themselves, and the cushion in front of them higher, so that the patient suffers no strain;
Then extend the minister's arm to the part dislocated from his hand, or to the elbow, and another minister to the other at the upper arm.
And then put the limb in its proper place, according to its natural form.
And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is a fragment that the heart does not want to release, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and a bandage, as we have said before.
And if the breakage involves a wound, I have spoken of it in a special chapter; take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration appear abscesses or ulcers, apply a plaster made from oil rosat and white wax, which should be neither too hard nor too soft; and you touch the plaster gently from above, until the abscess is soothed.
And then remove the dressing, and apply a plaster made from powder of millstone with enough wax, then put on the stents, and let the stent of the fracture be stronger, and a little larger than the others;
and know that it should have six stents or arms in several positions: let the fracture be in one of the bones, or in two;
and hold more firmly on the fracture than other parts, and all the less when touching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh;
and let the dressings that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh; and let the thread, which it is strained by, be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And look after the limb and the tendon after a few days. And if some bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wrap the limb with warm cloth, until that itching is alleviated;
and let the limb not be tightly wrapped to rest.
And then resume the constriction, and if the tendons are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, apply a remedy.
And beware that the nourishments cannot reach the limb, because it is too constricted, then you should loosen it a little, and let it be for some days, until the nourishment spreads, and then constrict it.
And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, then do not untie it for up to twenty days.
Or when entering, then he puts his hands on his neck, and his neck is even, and beware of movement and of degeneration, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the composition and complexion of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have said, there are few fractures, and it does not come but rather a sprain many times.
And when the joint of the hand is fractured or sprained, then it is necessary that the patient sits crossed, and sits upright before him evenly;
then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the fractured bones, and put them even with the mirrors, as long as they are well joined;
and apply a plaster and poultices, if an abscess does not come, then he puts a stake according to the quantity of the humor; and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is in the middle of the belly of the sole, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to his fractured foot; and then bind with a long cloth, and let the stake be of wood sufficiently thick as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
And if the fracture is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a stake on top, and another below in the sole of the foot, so that the hand is straight and upright, then tie all around the hand, and tighten the cloth between the two.
And if the fracture comes to one of the two bones, it is the shoulders, set them even, as it is necessary; and strain with the sole of the foot, and if you see that a small right splint is put in place to raise the fracture, and does not move;
and if the fracture is in the other bones, such as in the index finger or one of the others, set it even, and bind it with the healthy bone that is next to it; or you bind them all together, as seems best, or you put on a splint, just like a shoulder;
and take care in the restoration and in the treatment of hot abscesses, and dry those that come to it, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns to the front and back;
and the restoration is thus on one side of the fracture, and another beside it. And the patient puts his hands on his face, then each assistant extends his hand to his part equally;
and it is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, let one of the assistants be at the knee, and the other assistants beside the fracture.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the assistant be at the knee, and let the extension be below;
then put the doctor's hands on the bone equally with his two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if there are abscesses or wounds.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it be soothed, then return to your work and to its treatment; The ligature is made in a similar way.
It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a bandage doubled in two or three layers, and remove the superfluous, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the ankle, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come out above.
Then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the fracture these, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
Then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make even the pressure, then begin to tie firmly two or three turns around the fracture; and the more you go up from the fracture, the less it is constricted;
Then understand about the two heads of the thread that you have placed between the thigh and the hip, and in the third the stitches that are underneath, then return to the bottom at the head of the thread, until you come up against the foot;
and hold it tight, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then let there not come abscess or swelling or any other similar thing. And if it happens, then untie it, and treat what has come, as we have said many times;
and if it has pieces of bone that are piercing, then reset them in their place, if one can; and if one cannot, then reset by cutting the limb, and pulling forcibly; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the hip is broken thus where one puts stitches, as in the shoulder and or arm;
In all ways, during restoration thus made not to harm the patient.
And know that the thigh is restored in a day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complications.
Know that in the wrinkle of the knee there is little breaking, but it often cracks.
And if it breaks, it's nothing but a fissure, or a perforation, and there is a complete wound, and without a wound, and this is felt very well.
And the restoration is when one puts back in place that which is broken to its joints, as long as it is assembled with what one can;
then apply the plaster, and you put on a round steel, if you are skilled in the art, and hold it as needed, then observe all the treatments that we have said for other fractures, such as abscesses, heat, and similar things; Put to each accident what is suitable for it, as long as it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Be aware that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "tibia", and the other is called "fibula";
and it has the same kind of fracture as the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the work is all alike. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely.
And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and the goiter is visible; and turns to one side.
Then apply extension, and put it in place, and lay the splints equally;
but however, it is necessary for the fracture to be set, and there are many pieces, so that the extension may be smaller and lighter; and the wing according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two splints of split wood that enclose the thigh on one side and the other, and are as long as the thigh from the knee to the buttocks;
then wrap it in two cloths, one above and one below, and tie it in the middle, and to this binding do not let the thigh lean to the right or left, and thus it is well;
and let no one administer a bandage as long as the thigh, and it is of wood, and put it on the thigh to prevent movement, and properly make this in the fracture or where there is a wound;
and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or some other accident; if you treat him as long as he is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the foot
To the ankle comes no fracture, but to the bone of the foot comes sometimes a fracture and to the two bones, and it does not matter that they are shattered in many dispositions.
And if there is a fracture of the bone of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he were standing, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their place;
then apply the plaster and bandages above, and put on the bottom of the foot near the two tendons a small tablet, then bind the foot firmly, then that you have wrapped the dressings around, and other things that you have need of.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the ligament, for you will find the bones even, whether broken, whether dislocated.
And if there are some of the fingers broken, restore them, as we have said regarding the fingers of the hand; Then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then put beneath the foot that table that I have spoken of, and hold it firmly;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the table beneath the foot; and let it be fixed on top of the table beyond the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken of them. and treat each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone in the hip of the woman is broken, if it is made to swell, then it is inclined to the back part, and held from behind;
then fill the bath with warm water of the disease of the ulcer, and in it put a large stone as I said;
then undress the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then push the ulcer, until it comes to the entrance of the womb, and the bone returns with the stone;
and when she wants to urinate, remove the ulcer, and when she has urinated, put it back on her, and do this for seven days or within; If it will be restored the fracture, and you see, take a bladder of goat, and tie to the hole a chain, and put all the bladder in the nostril. then blow into the chain strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nostril will restore the fracture;
then it should be filled with cotton, and let it be thus for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the hip is fractured, either of the man or of the woman, it should be restored thus as we have said for the bone of the thigh;
and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who puts their study and effort, and understands my book.
For the fracture signifies in many ways the right way of restoration: understand it then.
In the rod, when it is broken, take a handful of ivy and tie up the rod; then wrap it in rags around, and let it be three days or therein, and it will heal quickly.
of a fracture with a wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed now, so that the healings that we have spoken of bear witness.
And if the wound heals, then anoint with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, if apostems of the ulcer does not come.
And if apostems of the ulcer does come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the apostems are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you would cause bad accidents to come.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the heart of the uncovered side, then you must put it in place lightly with your hands, to small extension.
And if the extension is not suitable for putting in place with your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has 7 or 8 fingers in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four, according to what is needed for each treatment of a fracture;
and let them be rough and a little thick, so they do not float in the compression on the member of your work, and let them be pointed at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved tongs are put on the head of the apparent bone; and beat it once, as long as it is straight, and even one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the muscles cannot grasp the bone well, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, so that the muscles have possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then cut it with an instrument suitable for that, whether to incise or sew, according to your power;
then remove what remains in the bone of splinters and small shards.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do this until it is in its place, then wrap it in a bandage soaked in black styptic wine, and properly if it is in a splint. and do not put anything on the wound, such as a cerote or other things that have oil, so that it does not bring about purulence and corruption;
then administer these things after you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted with the dressing;
and many times have foolish doctors done this, and brought about death or corruption to the patient, or made them ill at least; and let the dressing be softer and more gentle than other dressings.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that an evil accident will occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the body, then it is not necessary to put these things on; but wrap around, on the body of the wound, durable cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days an ulcer at the wound, remove what you had applied on it, and put on a healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment Tetrapharmacum and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you anoint the member two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is swollen and sore.
And it is necessary that the members be wrapped in such a way that the ulcer can be covered lightly.
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but instead discharges pus, know that there are small pieces of bone, because of which it is necessary that you examine the wound with a probe, and remove all these detached pieces that cause this pain.
And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in its chapter above.
And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death comes, but let it be until it forms a callus.
By chance it will close itself after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound, if you can.
and if you cannot, then leave it be.
Many times they come after the sanctification of the fracture, especially when it's near the joint, and the worst thing is to see the shape of the limb; and by chance it cannot make the limbs perform their natural functions.
Take care then that the wounds are fresh: if you administer medicines that draw in, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and other similar things, then take one of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine that draws in, or with vinegar of rose, or with oil; and put them on the nut with tourniquets, and hold it well, and do not untie it for a long time;
and put them on the nut with tourniquets, and hold it well, and do not untie it for a long time; and then untie it, and begin another, until the knot is loosened;
or you hold on a well-made piece of plaster; for the properties of plaster are such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
and if the knot has already converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above it, and make the excess appear; or you render it to some ease, until it be loosened, and the treatment until it be healed.
of a limb that is weak after the healing
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains after the limbs are weak and delicate, then it happens for many reasons: of the fact that one is because it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; or because it had too many ties, and the nourishments could not come to the limb; or from a multitude of roughness; or from too great movements, not in their proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you should make the patient eat, and make the body tender, until the blood is multiplied in it; and administer baths, and give joy and happiness;
then apply poultice to the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and roughness of bitter tar, until the nourishment runs to the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
the limb becomes twisted after the injury When the limbs are twisted after the resetting, and the broken bones are exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not lose its natural function:
if you do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
and these practices are to be blamed, and great evils come from them, and death often results;
however, if the swellings and the pain are fresh, then it is necessary that they be treated with warm water, or that softening herbs be applied, such as leaves of violets, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and make a softening plaster, such as a well-made diaquilon, and take the muscle of violet, and mix it with the fat of a goose or oil of cypress, and apply the plaster;
Or you take fat figs, and crush them with juice of coltsfoot, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
And sometimes the knot is removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with a moist hand. And restore movement to the limb every hour.
And if the tortured area is inflamed and hardened, like stone, and needs to be opened with iron, then you should carefully cut just to the bone, subtly and lightly. and put caution and study into the cure.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if necessary now bring back without delay.
For if one is late, the limbs become swollen, and by chance, if one resets them to their proper place;
because it is not suitable for one to move it to the place where it is swollen: many times it brings on spasms and other pains;
in any case, when this happens, make the patient healthy, then let him be, until the abscesses or tumors are appeased;
then raise the member from the cold and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as its cure will come into its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
It happens that the jawbones are dislocated and twisted, and the dislocation of both is in two manners: Where they are a little swollen at their joints, and slightly softened; Where they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot be held, nor can the mouth be closed, and wrap their tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns more quickly with multiple remedies.
And if it is complete and complicated, then you must reset it promptly, and do not delay;
and in such a manner that the minister guides the head of the patient, and puts his fingers in the pocket of one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on the lower jaw; and let the other two hands be separated, to put them in alignment;
and instruct the patient that they should loosen their jaws, and move them from all sides. And let the mire (physician) put it (the joint) back even, until it returns to its place.
And if the reset is grievous, similarly if these are the two jaws together, then they should be raised with warm water and oil, until they are reset lightly;
Nor do we speak of resetting, as we have already said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well without softening, then put on dressings moistened with a mixture made of oil rosat and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages;
and let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be held between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or left, nor exert themselves to chew, but take light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are numb;
and then chew what he wants lightly, and does not exert himself to open the mouth to eat and to drink, until the jaw is well cleaned and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their place in one hour, and are not converted to their uses, then there comes fever and habitual sweating, and by chance diarrhea, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of impending death; and many times he whom it happens to, dies within eight days.
The fracture cannot dislocate from the costal cartilage within the continuity of the rib and the breast, and is sometimes dislocated at the defect, and it is well felt.
And the restoration is that the patient puts his shoulder against his back, and extends his arms; and then press the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then put on the plaster and bind it tight, and constrain it;
and the part which is turned towards the hip cannot become dislocated; if it does not, and if it becomes dislocated at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the plaster and bind it tight, and constrain it, and instruct the patient to rest as long as he is healthy;
and likewise the head of the spine is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways:
one of which is when it becomes dislocated at the part above the armpit; and the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and does not dislocate behind at the shoulder, and does not dislocate within at the kidneys;
and often dislocates downward toward the armpit, especially to those who have little flesh, for to them the joint jumps with sudden movement;
to those who have enough flesh, it jumps with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And by chance some men have a blow or fracture, and the shoulder is swollen with a hot abscess, and it is thought that it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when it is downward toward the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a visible diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the bone touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were one bone; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his shoulders, nor move with any movements;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch;
and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is new, or if the patient is healthy.
And the method is that the ministers raise the patient's hand upwards, then put their fingers below the bone, and lift the joint forcibly upwards to its place; and the minister raises the hand and stretches it upwards, then puts it back in place; if it comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in two days afterwards, then it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in warm water; and let the anointing be soothing and softening, such as a decoction of leaves and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be anointed;
then let the patient be rubbed on their back, and put under the shoulder a cushion of wool even, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirror to his heel on the cushion, and lift the head of the patient's shoulder gently, and pull out the hand of the patient;
and another servant should hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; that shoulder returns now, and you see if it is reset according to this method:
and it is that you have someone present who is stronger than the patient; And let it be straight towards the costal area, and push the shoulder downwards from the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards, so that the patient's weight hangs in the air; And let another assistant pull the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then hang with him something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
And reset it in another manner:
and it is as if one fixes the long bone in the ground, so that the head is reset like the pistol, and is not too large nor too slender; then let it be put under the patient, but so that he has draped clothing above, and the patient is standing from the length of the trunk;
then let his hand be extended downwards from the other side, formed, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: Take the size of 4 fingers in width and 3 fingers in length, which has the head rounded to enter inside at the bottom of the joint, according to this shape:
then put on the head of the fist a soft cloth, so that the fist does not hurt the patient, then put it under the joint of the patient;
and stretch your arm to the fist of the length, and put the shoulder on the fist, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one of the sides of a wide chair, and let the other hand hang below, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint now returns to its place.
And when it is in place, in whatever manner that may be, then you must put under the joint an even layer of flax, then put on the plaster mixed with powder of mill, and incense and oil of  rose, on all the shoulder and around, then strain under the joint a little vinegar, and turn the linen on the plaster, and press the hand to its neck, and let the other hand remain in place.
And it is necessary that he massages a little, so that the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
and then massage more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is hardened and does not become softened, then it will not heal.
And if the joint is out of place because of moisture that has accumulated, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations to three parts, as it is written before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is of the chest, and the shoulders, or the back, is made by push, and extension of hands, and one administers another ointment;
and cures it until it is healed.
And after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowness in movement, so the patient must bathe it many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the elbow
It is known that the joint of the elbow is dislocated at the points, and at the points it returns;
and it is dislocated on all sides, and likewise in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, for one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the injured limb with the sound one, if you can see it openly. For the joint is strained, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscesses of the wound are removed, for if the abscesses were to come, it would be grievous to reset;
and by chance it cannot be reset completely, especially when it is in the back; it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you extend its hand with your two hands; and its arms are expanded, and the hands of the thigh according to the injured limb, above and below, and bind the joint to its skin together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it happens when one doubles their hand to their hand, and makes from the root of the palm the joint that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
and it is that two ministers stretch the arm, and two ministers hold it, so that it does not move during the stretching;
then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped it in a double cloth that is long and wide;
and when the mire joins the joint to their hand, then anoint with some oil to soften the joint, then bind the joint firmly, until it returns to health;
and when it is in place, then put on a dry plaster with wool and a bandage, and bind firmly, and hang the arm from the neck of the patient, and leave it for some hours, then undo it.
And if the joint is closed in its place, then untie the bandage, and let it go;
and if you see that the joint does not bind well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and let it be for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
And if it feels gritty after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a poultice of greasy wool, then let it stay for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath; and when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the poultice back on, and then enter into a bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healthy;
and if you see, then put on a warm poultice made with butter, and strain it;
if it returns to its natural position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the displacement is slight, more than the other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limbs are not swollen, or that an abscess does not develop.
And the reduction is done by placing the injured hand on a table, and extending the fingers of the hand, and the thumb placed evenly, so that it places its palm on the surface of the joint, and bends until it returns.
However, it is necessary for you to check if it is well in place; Then put the patient's hand on a table at extension and flexion. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and let the doctor put his hand on the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it's good. If not, then strain the poultices that soothe abscesses and let be without re-inflammation.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after some hours, then the joint remains twisted;
and do not harm the patient more than necessary, as long as the hand is swollen, and cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
If there is no other remedy but to constrain by cauterization of the case, and by chance it is not worth anything else.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then constrain it and let it be five hours, then unbind it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some swelling, then warm the wrist with warm water, and rub it until it is sound.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated to each side, sometimes to the back of the palm or to the front;
then extend the fingers, and push the dislocation to your pouched hands as far as it will go, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjoined;
and let it be for two days, and then put it even with the hair;
and anoint the body, as we have said, and untie the hair, and make it move, and anoint the body again;
and do this often, until it is straight, and also do the same if it is dislocated in the stomach of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy;
and also do the same, when it is dislocated in another area.
dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
When the shoulder blade from the back or neck is dislocated, where there are often multiple dislocations, if there is no point of treatment, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations come out by itself without will, and cannot be held, and often some members are softened, or the two hips or the two arms.
And often the urine changes to four parts;
That which changes at the bottom is called "glucosuria" or "diabetes":
The treatment is that you should reward yourself that the glucosuria has come from childhood: if there is no point of cure or healing for all of it.
And the one that comes from a fall or from blows or similar things, the ancient manners of cures said with grand words, where there is no great profit in all of it;
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed treatments in various ways.
I say that in the glucosuria that comes to the penis in front, there is neither engineering nor health;
and also that which comes directly to the two sides, and one cannot cure that which comes from the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient must be stretched on their face in a straight line, and have their spine restrained from them, so they do not bend;
then fix the one thigh to the ground firmly, and the other to the feet, and tie a bandage around the shoulders of the patient, and one to the hips, and to the knees, and to the calves;
and two attendants hold the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two thighs;
and they should be held firmly, the thigh as we have said, and the doctor puts his palms on the spine firmly, until it slips back into place.
And if it does not slip back into place with this treatment, take a table three feet long, and shave the surface, and let the patient be on their side, and put the end of the table under the shoulder, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put the mirror to his feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place;
and if you see, make it for the turner who turns with the hand. And it is that you fix two splints at the head of the patient's arm with a great bandage, and towards the feet the other two, and between each splint, separated and apart, a palm of space of a hand's length;
and have in each splint one hole, where the turner runs, and be the splint firmly on the ground, so that it does not move;
and between the two splints have one turning splint, on which the turns run, and have in the two turners two small splints of a hand's length, for turning the turner;
and then tie the string that is between the splints to the turner towards the head, and the other string towards the feet to the other turner, and each of the attendants turns his turner with all the string, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
And when it is even, put on a plaster made with a lot of vinegar, and then the poultices, and then the handle of a tablet of three inches in length, which should press on the place of the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use subtle nursing on the patient, until they are healthy;
and if anything comes at the end of the treatment, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the handle that we mentioned earlier; and sometimes it is necessary to administer a piece of flax, and sometimes the appearance comes in the upper part of the spine at the back, and beware that it may be a dislocation; and it is the bone that breaks, for which one should not have high hopes: By accident, death comes.
It is known that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder do not come out except for dislocations only, nor does it happen to them as it does to other joints;
and the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways: downward and upward, forward and backward;
and most dislocations are downward, and few are dislocated forward and backward.
And the sign of this dislocation downward is that when one joins the sick thigh with the sound one, it is longer, and the patient's knee opens more than the sound one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the ground; and the member that is affected by a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh-bone comes out of place.
And the sign of one who has come to the defect, is that this accident is contrary to what is before.
And the signs of one who has come to the fore, are that his leg is well according to the accomplishment; In any case, do not double the knee joint with pain, and if one wants to make it move, then it cannot beforehand, and it retains its urine, and inflames the groin, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of one who has come behind, are that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is out of place beneath the ribs.
The recall of this kind of dislocation is that you recognize if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, then there is no cure for it; and it does not matter that he has a presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the four manners of dislocation, you should hasten to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong minister, and strongly stretch the leg with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand from below in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then tightens with a soft bandage above the thigh; and another pulls the head of the leg;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If that is not so, then it is necessary to apply a treatment to its similarity.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, then you must support the patient on his healthy side, then put the linen on the root of the thigh, and the limb which is above the hip, then stretch the linen upwards towards the hip, and towards the strength;
then take another cloth under his arms, and encircle the large limb of the diseased thigh, and stretch it to the opposite firm; if it returns to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot constrain it in the manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the diseased person together with a strong linen bandage under the two heels, and under the two knees, and let the diseased leg be stretched two fingers more than the others;
Then let it hang from the head of a post, and let it be two arms length above the ground;
Then instruct the minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and let another minister be hanging with the patient, who will strongly hold the thigh, because the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is downward, thus the patient's thigh, as we have said concerning one who has a gibbosity, and pull the limb upward from the patient's own leg, and also from the hip;
Then put two clamps, one at the head and the other at the feet, then fix one clamp between the thighs of the patient in the middle; and let wet cloths be placed inside, so that they do not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the surgeon puts his hand equally on the dislocation.
If it returns, it's good.
If not, put on a table, and press thus as we have said in the gibbosity, and give the patient a bandage on the injured side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the sick thigh immediately, and according to what I have said; and put his hand on the healthy side against the sick ankle, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is backwards, it is not necessary to stretch the sick part downwards, nor lift it up from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip was dislocated backwards, as we have said concerning the lying down on the two hips; and let it be on its face, and the limb stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint against the table; and it will be at a point when the patient's legs are even, and they will be equal; then adjust the hips, and apply a plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then undo it, and apply the plaster on top;
and if you see that they are even, bind them as before, and let them be for three days;
then undo it, and make him walk gently, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee joint
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward, outward, and backward;
and does not dislocate at all forward.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not adhere to his hip, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your two, then bend the two sides of the knee to form; and another servant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and you signal that he should well have his leg on his thigh lightly;
and put the splint on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then undo it;
and do not bother the patient to get up, until the limbs are comforted.
And if the limbs are not in place, administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until he is healed;
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, inside and outside.
And the signs of it are that the ankle is weak, and swollen in front of the part where it is dislocated:
the reduction of it is easy, and the hand one extends gently with their hands when it is only swollen.
And when it is dislocated from the whole, then you must have the patient sit straight, and pull inwards firmly by the leg, above the ankle;
then take the foot with your right hand, and then with the left hand twice, then pull it upwards, and nicely push the foot upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
If it returns, it's good;
if not, then resume the work, because it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on the ground with his back straight, and pin the passage firmly to the ground between his thighs, and tie the drapels around, so that the patient does not escape;
then hold the thigh of the minister, and another minister stretches the foot to his hands or to the lien, so that he ties it on the neck of the foot; then stretch each minister equally, and let the passages be between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when they stretch it;
then put the mire equally to the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it has reached the limit, put the plaster on and apply pressure, and bind firmly, and tie the foot to the thigh, and watch the nerves that are behind the knee, so that the ligaments are not too tight.
then let it be for two or three days, and if the ligaments become inflamed, then bind firmly;
then undo it on the third day or the fourth, and have the patient rest for four days; and if he goes beyond that limit, it is not a certainty that he will dislocate again.
And if hot abscesses come, then it is necessary to treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of the fingers When the fingers are dislocated, then it is necessary to gently stretch them without effort, and it is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the vertebrae of the back or the foot, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns to its place;
and when it is even, and nothing opens, then put under the sole of the foot a table at two hands, then strain firmly, and leave it three hours, then untie it; and make him rest, until he is healthy.
of wounds and of dislocations together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are not piteous and merciful and slow, nor harsh;
and apply heat at the beginning of things that induce abscesses, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscesses which are hot may subside;
and when the limb is in place, then administer things that induce abscesses with heat, and treat the wound, as it requires, with dried dressings;
and if there is dislocation with fracture, and small bones are out of joint, then reset the bones, and do what we have said regarding simple ailments;
and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body.
