Oh, you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine, along with its fulfillment, and I have finished it through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, so the science is lost and concealed, and nothing remains of it except the little descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have made. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is removed.
Now it seems to me that I want to revive it along with the organization of this treatise, according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the irons of cauterization, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and of preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and the movement and rest of the veins, both moving and resting, and from their issue.
And for this Hippocrates said that the name is not much, and with the work is little; and we put our hands on the art
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, should be careful so that he does not fall into error and that he does not harm men.
so that I have seen many of those who undertake this science and if they abandon their own science and their own experiments.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut into the abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries near the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already seen it called for by the traitor, and seen the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if one touches it he dies.
And I saw another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break an open wound;
and the doctors complained of ignorance holding the break on the wound by strong binding, and did not let the wound breathe at all, and they left it thus for a term;
and he ordered that it not be untied;
and it remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot, and came to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg; and when I had it untied, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all along the corrupted area was confirmed on the member, and not the part to heal;
and did not stop the corruption from spreading through the member until the member became completely lost.
And we see another case where the abscess bursts the swollen apostume, and then becomes inflamed due to the malignancy of its symptom.
For a tumor, when it is full of melancholic humor, does not require anything but to be touched with iron if it is in the right place where one can then remove all that is corrupted.
And for this, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, a place where there is danger in many dispositions;
and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
For which reason it is necessary that you take care of yourselves, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Take your arms in consistency, and undertake your ills lightly and firmly, and make use of the better way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised;
and let go of the diseases that bring grief and bad health;
and put away from you that which makes you doubt, and have faith in you so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says distant from some of his admonitions: Do not take in hand a bad illness, lest you be called foolish doctor.
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about cauterizations of fire and also about cauterizations of sharp medicine, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet;
and of the forms of burnings, and of the cauterizations by fire, and of all that which is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and of ulcers and of wounds, and of the extractions of arrows, and of similar things;
and this chapter is ordered and are the forms of the burnings.
The third chapter is about restoring the dislocations and the distortions, and similar things;
and it is ordered concerning the high joints of the feet, and the forms of the burnings.
Although we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid, and of the harm, are the longest speech and subtle science and the secret responses;
and of this speaking many of the wise men agree;
and my breath is scarce for their words, for I dread the length.
I say that cautery helps universally all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: that is to say, a hot and moist complexion, and a dry and moist complexion.
In a hot and dry complexion with mixed matter, they disagreed among themselves and said that cautery is of great aid; and the others said the opposite: that cautery is not suitable for an illness that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure a hot illness with heat, nor with dryness.
and it is said by those who say the opposite that cautery provides great aid to hot and dry illnesses that occur in the body of men. For when you examine the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times through experimentation.
And let no one interfere with it except he who has experienced it, and who knows through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of the tension;
of other complexions we have no fear, similarly in cold and moist illnesses. And all the members assemble and agree with the cauterization.
And know, son, that fire cauterization is one of the secrets of the cures, and of greater goodness than cauterization of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and does not come except to the member which is burned, and does not harm another member unless by name.
The hot medicines come from one member to another by touching, and bring to the sick member the diseases of grievous sanitation; and by chance kills the patient.
The fire through its height and through the goodness of its substance does not do this, if it is not in excess.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
and for this I excuse the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I reveal to you the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; Receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they should agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and choose taking pains.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harmful effects which supervene are easily cured by the aid of the cauterization; and meanwhile the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hastenings that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think ever, dear son, as foolish people do; for the illness that is healed by cauterization has no relapse; and they tell it to him;
and they tell it to him; but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are not a medicine which alters the temperament, and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for the hastening of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and of its operation.
And it is possible that the disease comes from the complex condition of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue;
and are gathered in him the excesses by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if not cauterized with fire where there is little excess and moisture, as for cauterizing dense areas for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizing is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterizing is worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterizing is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures for a disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterizing, and it works.
It then appears clearly that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not in accordance with the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauterizations with instruments of gold are less damaging than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold and the height of its substance;
and they said that the application of cauterization does not cause putridity, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some men;
and cauterizations of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they praised them. And however when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know how hot it is by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
and if one heats it too much; it becomes discolored from the fire; and thus it has enough impediment
I have organized this chapter from head to foot, because it makes the journey easier to find.
These cauterizations are good for moisture and for cold on the head, and they are done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that flow from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to a multitude of songs and pain in the teeth and throat pain, and similarly for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cauterization is such that the patient should be purged with a medicine that cleanses the head, three or four times, according to what the strength and the age and the habit of the patient can endure; and then make the patient rest their head.
And then make them sit with their arms crossed between your hands, and put their hands under their armpits;
afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two eyes; and take your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from inside then heat the cautery that is called "olivare", whose form is this: And put it on the marked place from inside, and make it descend and constrict your hand little by little turning; then lift your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone a little swollen; and if you do not see it, restart the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
afterwards take a little wax, and put it in warm cotton inside, and put on the place, and leave it for three days;
After a dead body has been placed in a grave; and let it stay there until the cold has removed the stiffness; after curing the wound of the joint that is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healthy.
And the old ones said, that the more one keeps the wound covered, the more it purges; and for this reason it is helped by movement.
And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then scrape off what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
And others say that one should cauterize so much on the bone, and strike it so forcibly that one removes from the bone as wide a piece as the buckle that women put on their belts, because the humors issue freely outside;
and one must let the wound remain covered for a long time; after that, one must cure and cauterize.
And these two kinds of cauterizations do not seem to me to be good in every way, except for certain men in whom there is a vein of fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave it to the surgeon;
for the head is weakened by continuous discharges of a natural kind, as we demonstrate in other limbs;
and myself, when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems more healthy and beneficial to me, and for that reason I observe in the end a healthy outcome.
When in the whole head there comes chronic pain, and it lasts for a long time, then the patient should use roots and pills called "cochie", and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if they do the cauterization that we mentioned earlier, it is not worthwhile. Take care that the head of the sick person's arm is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize the one who has been burnt a little, as we have said before. Afterwards do cauterization on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and do the cauterization on the place that is called "vasels". and it is the place where one puts a poultice. and put your hand so that you do not feel all the way to the bone: the patients feel much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of them elsewhere;
and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form:
For the fire cautery of the head When in one part of the head there comes sudden pain, and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purged with medicines that cleanse, and one has done the other treatments that I have spoken of in the division of illnesses, and all this does not profit at all: Then one must make cauteries according to two methods, that is to say with hot medication and with fire.
The cauteries of hot medication are that you take a handful of herbs, and remove the bark and take a little of the head, and then apply it to the temple where the pain is held in such a manner that you can place the handful of herbs under the skin;
and when it has been applied, bind it and constrain it well and leave it thus for twelve hours; and then untie and treat with the doctrine of oil, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put on a plaster cast in butter until it can be recognized as bone.
After the treatment of unction as long as it is healthy;
and if you see that I have written about certain burning medications or the treatment of burning medications.
The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery made from iron, for that is its form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a nail or it has little curvature, and in the middle it has a small appearance;
and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the iron a little gently, until the half of the spear head is burnt;
and raise your hand so that the artery does not become hardened, which is defective, and remove excess blood.
Afterwards put cotton in a warm water bath, and apply it to the limb for three hours; then put moistened cotton in a poultice, and then treat the limb with ointment until it is healthy;
and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare", to the very tip, and beware of touching the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
of the migration
When you treat a migration as we have previously said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not improve, and you see that the previous statements of medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the cautery that is called "cultellare" until it becomes white;
and show thus on the painful limb a line of half a thumb's length, and lift your hand once, and hold tight that you do not touch the artery and that you do not come close to the bone;
and beware of the jaw that moves when one chews, and the nerves have no regard for what moves and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the evacuation of blood from the artery when it is touched, where touching it has great fear and shame for the one who does not know it, and who is not a studied and experienced; and leave the work in the middle of the way;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two edges; and it is a better cautery than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears caused by cold.
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has applied medicines that dissolve and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which this is the form:
After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around the two where the pain is held in both, and a little below the root of the ear since you have marked the place of the injection; and have ten points around each ear;
After the cure, leave the limb alone as long as it is healthy.
Of the torture of the mouth.
Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not fiercer than those which move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of the illness;
and do not perform cauterization on similarities that come from bloody flux and from spitting of kidneys.
When you cure this type of torture that moves with phlegm of kidneys and purging of head and gargling, and it is not effective, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little further back from the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips;
and put the cauterization in the part that opens cleanly, and have it cauterized directly on the head of the ear a little below the crown of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb; and let the cautery stay on as long as the pain of the heart is eased;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the cutellaire that we have mentioned before, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a bit thicker;
after the cure of the limb as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When the case of apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then apply four cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the member called "vassel" as we have said before, and the fourth cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be treated as we have said before.
Of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient great and powerful pills that purify the brain;
afterwards anoint the head of the patient all over, and apply to the back of the head a plaster of mustard which is written or treated in the book of plasters;
and this is the manner of the cauterization: if you do it as I have said.
If he is thus healthy; it is good; and if he is not, then have three cauterizations made on the middle of the head descending to the neck, and let there be a space of one finger between each cauterization;
and cure him like the others, and if you see him often, and the patient is suffering, then have one cauterization made in the middle; and his profession is, one on the two horns, and the cure as long as he is healthy;
and let the cauterer be called "olivare", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be anointed with herbs and with that which we have said before;
afterwards anoint the head of the patient, then make a cauterization in the head and on each horn, and on the back and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you are in a similar profession, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is strong, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most painful spot is scarred, and raise your hand; After the treatment until he is healthy, and it is the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
of epilepsy
Epileptics must not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to modify the treatment with herbs and other cures that we have mentioned in the section when the patients are great and suffering from a lack of medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, have them gargle and chew modifying the brain often with good meat broths;
after the king has made a thousand, and have it cauterized according to what we said before, and cauterize on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffering, have them cauterized as I said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let it be cauterized with olivier according to the method that I said.
If the patient is a woman, then make for her a subtle cautery in this manner:
When because of melancholy the superfluities or the corrupt humors and gross phlegm are, then the cautery of hot irons as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
And if because of melancholy the superfluities decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give to drink a thing by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is stated in the division.
After that, examine the head of the patient; after make a bandage well done, like a circle, and put it around the head;
and the patient should be cross-wise, and held firmly on all sides;
after apply the plaster, and take care to cover with old barberry butter; and let it warm at moderate fire, so that one can boil the pus to make it suffer; after having seen the circle from within in the head, and let it cool down;
and do this to the patient each week once with another good governance, until they are healthy.
Or if you see that it is necessary to cauterize, make many points on the entire cauterized area.
This type of cauterization resembles a brain in equilibrium;
and then put on it cotton moistened in butter and in fat of goose.
from the pain of the eyes When pain comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then give and let the patient drink something warming the head, and the guard against all humidity, and make them sweat with baths many times while fasting.
After instructing him to shave his head, and having cauterized in the middle of the head, and having made two cauterizations on the two temples if the descent of the brain is with the two eyes together, or where one descent is in one eye;
and let the cautery reach all the veins and arteries that are close to the brain, and let the cautery be as long as the width of the temple;
and beware of the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop immediately with a cloth.
And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and in the cutting of the cautery how you will stop it;
and sometimes a cautery is made or a splint put behind the two bones;
and one sees that it is from cold and phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cauterization that I spoke of at the beginning of the treatment on the eyes: I apply a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations or branding irons under the two bones; and if it is more swollen, then cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give the patient three drinks of warm potions; after the king's head, and make a cauterization in the middle with an olive-tree cauterizer; and make two cauterizations with the cauterizer called "clavilis" above the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrows;
and beware of the artery that you do not touch it.
And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the parchment of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery that is called "olivare". because of which this is the form:
And if you see that there are two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not let go of it with your hand unless until the third part of the parchment is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into a membrane, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two methods: It is to know of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cauterization, instruct the patient that they should let the hairs grow as long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your care; afterwards mark on the skin of the eyes a figure that should be as wide as the width of the middle finger, and let the beginnings of the sign be among the hairs;
then put moist cotton in a glass of oil and anoint the eyelid with the juice of periwinkle on the eye, then heat the cauterization instrument to the form that it is:
Afterwards cauterize on the figure that you have marked little by little several times, so that the vessels are burned in that place;
and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the skin drawn back, and the hairs raised to the point of the nail;
then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three hours, then put moist cotton in a poultice as long as the numbness is removed; after the treatment of dislocation until it is healed.
And after the skin becomes calloused, and the hairs grow, then the skin is softened, afterwards recommence the cauterization on the same spot, as you did previously;
and if the hairs are defective, then cauterize until the skin is elevated to its natural state, and is even, and does not press on the hairs of the nail.
The medical cauterizations with burning are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle;
Then take French soap and living ashes, of each one a half ounce, and mix them well together; and apply it quickly, so that it does not get cold, then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of a myrtle, and put some on the papier of the eyes; and if the illness holds in one eye or the other, one should open it, and if in both then also; and put two cotton threads moistened with oil of rue into the opening;
and the head of the patient be in your hand and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the hole and rub the mouth every time the patient feels a biting sensation from the medicine, for it feels like a biting as from fire.
When you have held it in place for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger. And when the morification will be passed, if the limb is lifted from the water, and examine it if you see the skin lifted as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is good.
If not, then apply again the medicine on the limb or where the medicine did not work, until your operations are even, and your eyes are set to the point;
then put on cotton moistened in broth until the bitter heart is cooled, after cure the limb of the joint which is called "diafonis" and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary that you take care well of your work with great care so that it does not happen that the point of the medicine reaches the eyes.
And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, then reapply the medicine on that limb which is softened by the skin properly, thus as you have done before; After the treatment until he is healthy;
and it is the shape of the abscess of the dead flesh:
And it is known that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this will be their constrictions;
and let not the right way be hidden from him whose study is this art.
Of the treatment of fistula by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not profit, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it bend its neck;
afterwards put moist cotton on the vein or in the juice of melilot on the eye;
After heating the cautery which is applied:
and it is shaped to the head like the form of a wing of a shoulder, together with which is the cautery;
if you see, it should be pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you see, it should be also like a tent;
but nevertheless, this is what is shaped for your work.
After pressing the fistula, it is covered, and in drawing out the pus, and the dryness; and it is closed, thus the work, and draw out the fluid from the belly;
after putting on the cautery hot ferment, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the kidney near the navel, so that your hands do not cause harm; and put the cautery in the fat of the navel, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery near the bone, it would be good. If not, then restart the cautery once more, and also if you are a professional at it, and let it be for three days;
After I apply a moist cotton cloth to the area, and treat the joint with a dissolving ointment until it is healthy, and if forty days pass and it is not healthy, then apply a caustic medicine as long as the bone is covered; and let it be governed according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is a type of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Cut into the fistula, and make the place; After put in the incision a thin iron instrument of which this is the shape: and they make an amount of a kind of poultice; and hold the hand or wrist firmly, and do not move the patient's joint, so that the applied poultices do not go to their eye;
and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a moist cotton in a basin of warm water or in a bath:
the poultice if applied near the place of the fistula, and the sound part by miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a probe to the navel, and to bring the fistula to the body of the navel according to what is proper for its own place.
of cracks on the lips Many times there occur cracks on the lips that are called "poil", and similarly on the lips of infants.
When you treat these cracks of the bone that we have spoken of in divisions, and the treatment is not beneficial, then heat up a small cautery iron according to this form:
And put it hastily into those cracks until it comes to a flow;
After the treatment, anoint the limb with cerote until it is healthy.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after putrefaction and decay and it becomes swollen and develops into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all: then it is necessary that you apply the cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron comes to the flow of it, and cauterize the area;
and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is thus cured, it's good; and if not, then you should uncover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that does not work, then put the head of the patient in your healthy; after heating the cauterization tool whose shape will be described later, in such a way that you put a chain on the tooth;
and put the hot cauterization tool between the teeth hastily, and hold it as long as your hand can, so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
After lifting your hand and restarting the cauterization according to your will;
after the patient has filled his mouth with salty water, and holds it for an hour and spits out frequently.
And in the same way the teeth that were loose are confirmed, and the gums softened are restrained, and the rotten moisture is dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or decay, and medical treatments are of no value, then it is necessary to perform cauterization in two ways: and cauterization with borings and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with borings is such that you take borings of a cow, and put the tip in an iron or steel spoon; after taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a stick, and moistening it in hot borings, and putting it on the aching tooth quickly and holding it until it is cooled;
And thus do often as the virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are wet in cold broth, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the hot iron so that the pus comes to the gum of the tooth.
The cauteries together with fire are such that you grasp an iron or copper chain, and it is so large that the pus does not come to the mouth of the patient;
after heating the cautery, from which the abscess will come out after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled;
do this often, for the pain will be lessened that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good cold broth in the application of this cautery, and then pull it back;
and it is the form of the cautery:
And perform cautery on whichever part of the head you wish, and according to what you are able;
and it is the form of the cane:
of the scrofula When the scrofula are of phlegm and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery applied to that place from which afterwards comes the form, and it has two openings for the humors to issue from the cautery of the other part;
and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or it is a second task, until it comes to the source of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small then put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on cotton moistened with butter until the abscess is discharged;
after the cure of the limbs and of tendons until it be healthy.
When the humors prevail over the channels of the wrist, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be treated first with solvent medicines;
after he has undergone cautery to the root of the throat, and beware that you not come near the throat, and do not kindle the heart except a little.
After he has undergone another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be which is called "clavicle" from which we have the form in front;
and cure the limb as we have said before until it be healthy.
When all and the disease of lungs are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor cough, and it is a chronic disease, have two cauterizations on the chest in the veins; and another cautery in the breast between the two breasts;
and let the cautery be that which is called "clavicle" according to the form that was mentioned before.
And if you see, make a cautery by pricking the entire cautery that is called "poins" of which the form was mentioned before in the disease of the ears;
and let the poins be just to thirty, or within that.
After the cure of the back according to what was said before, and let the cauterizations be at three ribs according to this form:
And for this reason, the cauterizations are made lighter, because you make three of them at one time.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards the patients are swollen on their back and on their sides; after that, raise the heart which is within the diaphragm with your left hand fingers;
and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the cauterization which has two nerves where it is the form:
and cauterize the heart as long as it penetrates to the side, and the figure of the cauterization comes together with four cauterizations;
and for this reason it is made with the cautery that has III nerves, because the figure of cauterization are six cauteries;
and the nerves are according to the thinness of a thread and it is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
And sometimes it is adjusted on this one nerve because it has eight cauteries.
After put on the cautery, burn with a flax seed or a flake; after make the patient rest, and not move the limb by long tension as long as it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little matter that has happened, then make a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle, or many cauteries by pricking.
For the joint is closed again, and the moisture is dried and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach there come chills and a lot of moisture as it stretches to its complexion, and are multiplied the catarrh to him, and in manners of accustomed treatments he does not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be warmed on his back, and extend his legs and hands. Of this, afterwards make three cauterizations on the skin of the leg for the quantity of an egg, on all the curved cautery, and two cauterizations on the two sides as long as the figure of the cauterizations is at three angles, and have a space between one and the other so that they are not joined together when they will suppurate;
and let the cautery be so deep that it pierces the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you see a cauterization of a large cauterization in the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at the point according to the quantity that you see of the thickness; then cauterize all the cauterization that is called "points".
After the cure of the wound that we had in front, as long as it is healthy.
When to the liver comes pain of cold and of moisture and of great windiness, as long as it is made foul from its natural complexion by the superfluities; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, thus it is necessary that the patient be warmed on his liver; and mark three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, against the hypochondries, where the pain of the sides or the pain of the loins comes;
and has a space between each cauterization the thickness of a finger and let the cauterization be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too much on all the cauterization;
and let it be so slightly the size of the heart, and let the patient stand upright on his feet;
and if he cannot, then let him be seated, and stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms;
And if it is your will, then cauterize these cauterizations of the cutaneous layer, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and that it does not come to boiling, for the heart is very subtle in that place, and one should be cautious to see;
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, he feels a very sharp pain.
And when this treatment of the abscesses is done, it is necessary that the patient be supported under his head;
and then mark with a sign the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a razor, of which this is the form: And cauterize the cautery as much as the area is burned, and come up to the sphincter, as much as the perineum is entirely cauterized;
after the treatment according to the treatment of the abscesses until he is healed;
and it is not suitable that anyone uses this cauterization except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have been corrected many times.
Then he can hardly work, and still it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
against cauterizing the pleura or lung tissue
The ancients said that one must perform cauterization on the lungs using roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: Take a root of aristolochia as long as you can find, the largest possible, and let it be dry, and let its thickness and length be that of your two fingers; and mix it with oil, and apply it to the fire, and perform the cauterization between the shoulder and the neck, and perform two small cauterizations slightly descending on the area beneath the beard;
and apply cauterization between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backwards a little; and apply one cauterization in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest opposite the cauterization which is between the shoulders;
and do not press with your hand, but make it open as if in a fragrance.
And certain ancients said that no man should use the fire cauterization similar to a razor, and they warmed it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and the pain will disappear, as we have said in the case of the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear that the patient will die now, or a fistula will come which cannot be healed.
of the worm
When you treat the disease of the knee that we have spoken of in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit from them, then there are three manners of cautery that are good.
One of the manners is that you make three or four cauteries, applying them along the length of the knee, according to the shape of the cautery of the foot that we have spoken of before;
and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be seated behind his back;
and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery that has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the heart which is near the knee, or where the cold of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevation that you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After that, inflate the two nerves as much as the heart is perceived from the other side, and then apply the cauterization, and thus in this way there will be four.
And if you see that it is necessary to cauterize all three nerves.
After the treatment when it has been acquired by long tension, and this is more useful than the other treatments mentioned before.
Cauterization is not suitable for someone with dropsy, except in the manner that is called "ascarides" or "ascites" being referred to as  «asclytes» likely meaning ascites, a condition of dropsy.
When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment is not beneficial, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the right side of the chest. and let the cauterization be well applied to the thickness of the scar.
Afterwards, leave the cauterized area uncovered for a long time to drain the purulence, and do not hinder the healing of the wound after the cauterization; and the healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be joined together with the help of God.
The shape of the cauterization on the abdomen is the clavele that we have previously shown; and that which is for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been set forth before.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of watery citrine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the little finger; and lift your hand with the cauterization without turning.
And do not enter too deeply, thus would be the exterior of the citrine area, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
After that, apply on both thighs two cauterizations, one on each thigh at the tip of the culellatier area; and let the cauterizations be from the length, one of them beneath the knee in front and the other behind, on the middle of the thigh;
and leave the cauterizations to burn for a long time without covering, so that the area becomes dry;
after the treatment of the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When a looseness of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtue which is in the stomach and intestines becomes weak, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment; and you see the patient suffering and of strong virtue, make the great cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before, or the cauterization of the stomach, in circular cauterization. and four subtle cauterizations around the navel for every subtle cauterization of the spine, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the muscles abundant and the patient suffering, make a cauterization on the nail, and one cauterization on each heel, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the navel, for the treatment is profitable when it has good aid.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or several, and are ancient and are of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are curable as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit unless cauterizations are made: On the spine of the back, there is a cauterization which is all deformed and rough, little by little in a triangular shape, and the fire cauterization is on the navel for two fingers;
and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face swollen, then one applies a large cauterization on the stomach, as has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cauterizations being applied; and let the cauterization remain on for a long time. After the treatment, leave it alone until it is healed.
When you cut into the callus, heat up the cauterization that seems suitable, and then apply it all burnt on the cut callus; and let your hand be so that the cautery iron comes to the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows.
Do it once or twice, and if there is much of the humour, then cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of profitable members as long as they are healthy;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the Achilles tendon, it will have more benefit.
When the patient cannot bear cutting or surgical opening, which we will discuss in its proper place, then comes a disease that cannot be cured except by cautery.
When to any comes fistula, and it is inflamed and irritated by purulent matter and corrupted humours, then examine thoroughly with a subtle touch, and take care that you know the entire depth of the fistula.
After applying the cautery that seems to raise the hair, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tendon has entered, and renew the cautery as long as those rotten and corrupted bodies are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of the sore's need.
and protect the nerves that are in danger, and the large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, protect those places, and do not make those sores that are in the flesh raw, and think that it is not a perforating.
after curing the flesh as long as it is healthy, and if the sores are suppurating, and the matters are thrust out for a long time, then consider that the sore is entirely healthy.
and if the matters are not thrust out, think that the sore is rotten, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted. and thus like one of these things that we will tell about in its place
When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and of great swelling, and does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavicle cauterization that we have previously mentioned;
and if we perform the cauterizations in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will be of greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and cold from moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then perform cauterization on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin to grow, and to the right and to the left, and let each cauterization be as long as a finger;
and have them apply the cautery on the back, or if you are in a need of it;
and let the cauteries be applied to the collarbone according to the previously mentioned form.
When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for this reason to conceive, and the flesh is corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to have three cauteries made around the belly, as we have said regarding the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back;
and let the cauteries be applied to the collarbone, as we have said.
When the viscous humors descend to the box of the thigh, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
and it is found that the limbs of the department are visible, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the box of the flank to a cautery similar to the circle, and sign in front of the limb around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle;
and if the cauteries are such that one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, make three cauteries of the large olive tree, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the hearts;
and heal it until it is healthy.
of the pain of the flank When pain comes in the box of the flank, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure is not effective, and the illness is ancient: Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick foul humors of stinky pills, or other similar bad pills. After you have done the cauterization;
and the manner of doing the cauterization is according to two methods: that is to say, applying burning medicines together, and cauterizing with fire.
Cauterization with fire is according to many methods, of which one is the following:
that you cauterize on the box of the ankle three triangular cauterizations in this form, and make them deep and large, and have between each cauterization a space the thickness of a finger, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped;
sometimes one does a cauterization in the middle on the head of the ankle, because there are four according to this form:
And if you see that the cautery of the circle which we have previously mentioned regarding the dislocation of the thigh;
but make it in such a way that the circles contain the entire thigh, and all the parts of the heart are raised.
And this is the way one treats sciatica, when the pain is in the thigh, and does not reach either the knee or the leg.
And if it reaches the knee and the leg, then make two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle four fingers, on the left side a little;
and let the cauteries be applied with caution, and let the parts of the heart be raised with artistry;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers or near the navel, then cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "points". And if it is a trade, then one does more of it;
and if it is known that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then perform cautery with a circular or ring-shaped cautery iron, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater nuisance and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the leg near the foot, and left it so long that the leg became completely swollen, and the foot as well, and was pierced through and corrupted all the way to the foot. After a intestinal rupture from which he got death.
And if the pains are in two places together, perform cautery in one and in the other, in this manner.
And the wise men said in the cautery of the thigh, that this is the manner, make the iron tool and let it be as thick as a nutmeg seed, or a little less, and let it be notched and let one notch go into another with the space of a thumb;
and let the notches be open on both sides, and let them also be like nuts, and let the iron hand be well made;
and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is entirely red and let the patient feel its heat, and then apply it to the diseased thigh, and let it be turned around the sore area;
and let the cautery be applied once and let it stay for three hours; and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound stay covered for a long time; After the treatment of the injury as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the danger of its application, and few see those who use it;
and nevertheless these are good cauteries, which one can endure, and where they are beneficial.
The medical cauteries are such that you make the instrument to insert between the lips of the wound, and it should be of copper or iron with a long edge, and in height two nails, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and are open at top and bottom, and join together according to this form:
After that put on the bandage of the thigh to the patient sitting on his healthy side, and press your hand much on the bandage of the thigh; After the injury between the two circles of the warm water that has been heated by the fire a little, and let it be for an hour of ten, and the patient suffers from heat and burning of it.
For he finds mortification as if from fire;
and when the mortification has passed, raise your hand with the instrument and lift the edge of the warm water, and let it be for three hours, and put on a poultice as long as that which is black from the scab falls off; and let it be for three hours that the pus comes out in a stream;
and this would be the last aid after the treatment of unctions as long as he is healthy.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, have made an instrument that holds water according to what you have done on the injured limb;
and it is the manner of the hot water, and I have written it in a treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkaline substance and living lime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. or it has a small hole made so that the point of a razor can enter;
or it has a small hole made so that the point of a razor can enter; and put that pot into another well-plugged pot, and put on it alkaline substance and lime and sweet water, as much as you will have the powders well ground when you have grasped it with your hand;
and let it be so until the water descends and the pot is unplugged, then take all that water, and pour it on the lime and on the alkaline substance as before.
And then it will be very sharp and is administered in many medical treatments and in cauterizations of other limbs.
For it performs the work of fire, and if with other medicines that one cauterizes well the ankle thus as thesis and meal anacardi and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure in which a man was cured of the pain of the ankle and of the sciatic vein, and he loved it much, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here afterwards.
And says in such manner that you take green fresh and dry litharge, and crush it much with a bit of grease, and put it on the ankle and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it;
and let it be for three hours and by the quantity that the patient does not feel the burning anymore.
And then make him enter into a bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and make him enter into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healthy.
And be aware that one should not use cauterization of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a fiery cautery, it helps a great deal;
and the cauteries should be done in the same manner. Take the wool and the extract of old oil, and apply it to the fissure which is between the hollow of the foot and the other which is called the heel.
Afterwards take dry cauterizing iron, and heat it in fire until it becomes charcoal, and apply it to the wool, and let it stay until it is cooled.
and redo this again, and do not stop doing this as long as you think it is necessary until it comes to the thigh, and that the pain be eased;
and this type of cauterization is called "cauterization of the lip".
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, either by falling or by percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar things of cold matter spread, none of these things is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after that, that the patient be treated with foul-smelling pills or other similar things, that one apply to their back, there where the pain is, three lined marks of incision, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer;
And let the cauterization be done according to the cauterization that is called "poins".
and if you see it, do three or four cauterizations on the middle clavicle according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to little children, and the signs of the affliction are that they have a constricted arm when they lift themselves, and fear; and you will find in the upper part of the spine of the back and in the appearance that comes from the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you consider it to be cured, then cauterize it with the cauterization of that member according to this form. Thus the cauterization affects each part of the spine equally.
And if you see it, then cauterize around the spine with the cauterization that pricks two or three lines, and let the points be near one another.
After curing the injury as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cauterization in a place where there are nerves in danger of being damaged.
of the pain of the joints
When pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the physicians call "podagra" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in such a manner:
Make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is a spot where you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cauterization at the entire area that one calls a "point". And if the pains come near the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then one should perform cauterization on each knee three or four times, with olive oil for all the cauterizations.
And if you are a master of many things, do more, but do not hold back your hand more than necessary so that the pressure of the instrument is gentle.
And if the pains descend near the knees and to the back, administer the cauterization that we have spoken of in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines;
and if there remains a point of pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come near the ribs or near the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good governance for the patient and think of medicines.
For if you make a good government for yourself and purge the phlegm, you will be healed with the help of God.
When a rupture comes to the entrails, and the bowels descend to the groin and it is new, then it is necessary that when you want to cure it, that you do not touch that member today; and that he uses things which lighten the stomach, so that the feces descend from his stomach;
after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his belly as long as the bowels are being repaired, and put them back in place, and sign from below the rupture on the bone of the hip, and make a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery according to what its form is:
As long as they are bald and throw away sensations. Then reset the intestines to their place; and let the assistants hold his hand so that it does not turn back;
and open well the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion under him and a servant on the thighs, and another on his chest who holds his hands;
then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommend it again another time until you come to the bone; and beware subtly that the intestine does not protrude when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that because of this the patient does not die, or have other ills.
And know that when you do not apply the fire to the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is fitting that the cauterization of children be subtle according to the measure of their ears, and for large people also large according to their measurement;
after three days cure the limb from the cautery of tar until the scab is removed;
after curing other ulcers until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days while the wound is well dried;
and it is fitting that his bandages be tied loosely, so that the belly does not swell when he gets up to go to the chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a well-made splint should be applied to him, and the poultice for another 40 days;
and let it have good rest, so that it works little and guards against too great a filling of drinking and eating, and of too high a fever.
and when he makes this teaching then is health entirely.
And I will speak afterwards of the treatment for cutting in its chapter.
When ruptures come in other bellies and are connected, and you see that they do not grow more, then have made the cautery of the cautery repeated according to its quantity, and let it be the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with a cautery at three angles according to this form:
but first mark the limit of the flesh and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in the middle to all the cauterized claw.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moderate.
of pain in old age in any member When pain comes in any member, from a fall or a blow, and that pain holds for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a cautery which is called "poins", and let the cautery be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of torsions and of its pain.
if it is healed by the first cauterization, that's good;
if that does not work, recommend another cauterization on that one, for such is the custom that it must change in the member which is affected, therefore it is necessary that you do the cauterizations as long as the patient is not healed.
The doctors are helped many times by cautery with great aid, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see the need to cauterize, beware that the disease is at its beginning, and if it is curable according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the whole disease, then make a cautery on the head. Put one cautery on the head at the navel, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the occipital bone;
and let your hand be such that the cautery reaches just to the bone, and as long as the scorchings issue forth so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out;
and the cauterization on the mouse according to what is in front of it.
And if the mixture is scattered all around; and it falls manifestly, then you should apply the cauterization of these cauterizations that we have mentioned in the head, and one cauterization on the nape of the neck, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the thigh, and another below it, and two on the shoulders; and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and of the feet, and on the palms of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the rear calf, that you do not burn them;
and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the finger, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I do of cauterization, the more it aids him, and moves him to profit;
and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cauterization as much as they think they do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the cases.
After the cure, anoint the limb with flour of wheaten bread and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When inflammation comes into any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then have cauterizations on the limb according to its size and smallness.
and let the cauterization be a little within the thickness of the skin; Then heal the joints as long as they are healthy.
And sometimes cauterization is performed on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is reduced;
and in no way should one interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "paralysis" has invaded, and the engines of medicine are of no value, then cauterization with a cautery is performed somewhat deeply, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed;
Then heal with flour of roots and with lenses using rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of colchicum and blood of almonds, each a part; and be wrapped altogether, and be tied with a cloth, and be raised to the level as long as it is healthy.
The treatment of cancer by cauterization
When cancer comes at the beginning, and you want to stop it, then cauterize with a cauterizing iron which seems a circle, all around the tumor of the cancer.
And all the wise men said that one should do cauterization in the middle of the cancer;
and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen many times;
and the most rightful thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cauterizing iron that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
When some people have a disease called «adubelati», and it slows down their urine or because of the excess that it produces or because of the pain of the disease when it is decrepit (that is to say too old) and they have little blood, or because of their tension; and you hasten the stoppage of urinating: then one cauterizes within many small cauterizations by pricking; after that, leave it thus. For it will hasten the stoppage of urinating.
And if you hasten to pierce all the cauterization, heat the cauterizer from where its form is:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called «adubelati» until the cauterizations have pierced the heart, and let the cauterizations be such that the patient feels better in some manner so that the course of the disease is alleviated.
After the treatment as long as it is perfectly healthy.
Another kind of disease is what is called "corrosion", and it is nothing other than a wasting away of a member, for it wastes the members just as fire does the dry wood.
If you see this disease in a patient who can suffer cauterization with fire, then heat the cauterizing irons very little and greatly, according to what is needed for the patient or where the disease is.
After the cauterization of all parts as long as you eradicate all the corruption, and do not leave any of it, that all that is corrupted be removed.
And then let it be for three days, and apply to the cauterized limbs a soothing balm made with oil, until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of painful gums produces fever.
And if you see that after three days a healthy gum does not grow, it is good;
and if it does not, then repeat the cauterization on that which has remained of the rotten flesh.
And this swelling has sometimes been cured by sharp medicine instead of fire cauterization;
but nonetheless fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already spoken of the cure by sharp medicine in the division: take what you have in your profession.
of stones that come to the feet Many times it happens that in the feet by default arises a disease which is called "cloches" according to our intention, and is a large false body that blocks the foot.
And the cauterizations of this disease are in two ways. It is to know about cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water.
Cautery of fire is that you heat I, the cautery iron, as is a pen of hollow metal, and be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and that it has subtle edges;
after you put all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it stay thus three hours until it induces a purulent discharge; then make a plaster of wild mallows bruised with oil, and let the plaster stay on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots.
Then treat the wounded limb by anointing with heat until it is healthy.
And if they are affected by various humors in the body, and often occur in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization of warm water. and it is in a similar manner: Take a chain of iron or of steel, or a needle of a spearhead, and put it on the nail and the elbow, that is to remove warts; and put the chain on it so that it embraces all around, then put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand turning it so that the margin of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and then find the warm water passing deep to the root;
and let the patient suffer a little the burning of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself completely along with all its roots.
Thus do one thing after another, as long as you treat all those who are in the body, then cure the wounds that produce fever.
When some people shiver from cold or from nerves, or from quartan fever or other, it is suitable that you do four cauterizations or four on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebra; and one cauterization on the foot, and one on the stomach for an olive cauterization;
if it leaves the trembling, and hastens the health from the cold disease.
Some times appear on the body boils, or festering pimples, that come from corrupted thick matters.
it is suitable at first when they appear that one do cauterization on each head of the pimple: A subtle cauterization of the skin with a pointed instrument heated by fire, or with the root of aristolochia longa, or with a lentical cauterizer.
And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when it appears, in this manner, and it cannot grow from the wounds beforehand, but is broken up the excess flesh that comes from them, and they are healed;
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the cut artery that come from the wound in the armpit, or from the incision of an abscess, or from cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to staunch.
And always when that happens to someone, if you hasten to put your second finger on the wound of the vein, and strain a lot so that the blood is calmed beneath your finger, and does not come out anymore;
then put to the fire the olive cauteries many small and large as they are well roasted red;
then take I, either large or small according to the wound and the place in which the artery is broken, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery as long as the blood is restrained.
And if it still flows when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is not effective, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stanched;
and beware that you do not injure the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come to the patient;
and be aware that when the blood does not flow from the artery, one cannot well restore it, especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods that we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tightening of a thread, or by medications applied which have the power to restore blood; and let it be bound and constricted firmly.
For one will not profit from binding a tight bandage or placing warm things on, or other similar things, if not much.
And if it happens to anyone and he does not have a doctor or medicine present, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind it well until it is restored above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the [affected] part, but rather apply cold moisture often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and restrained;
and make inquiries beforehand about what is needed for cauteries and medicines.
We have said in the first chapter all about the disease for which it is necessary to use fire cauterization, or burning medicines, and the tools and causes and instruments and forms of cauterizations;
and I placed that chapter concerning the head down to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because one finds it easier what one desires.
And thus I begin with this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauterizations, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. if there come those who are so accustomed to their illness that they move lightly because of the familiarity they have with their disease, and the greatness of their suffering; and one should be afraid of these.
And to this one who gives his opinion, and says: wait, I am a leper"; and the disease is contemptible.
It does not matter that you consent to those who come to you with this condition, but put greater consideration in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely regarding that which you are certain of, and that which you can have taken and gained.
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your diseases so that health may be converted.
and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and long memory.
Dearest son, Our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter for you by dividing it into chapters, according to what it is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have divided for you from head to feet, so that you find more easily that which you will need.
It is known that this illness often comes to infants at birth, and when the midwife holds the head of the infant too tightly;
and sometimes it occurs without any apparent reason that one knows.
And I have never seen this illness except in infants, and most of those whom I have seen hasten their death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth including the treatment in several cures.
And I saw an infant whose head was full of anguish, and the head grew so large every day that it could not be supported;
and the moisture increased so much that it became a tumor, and this tumor is assembled below the bone on the spine, between the heart and the bone;
and the works are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make in the head a wide incision;
and let it be as long as two of us, until the moisture flows;
and see to the form of the spatula or spoon;
If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is disordered in the bone, and the signs that you see the sutures of the head are open on each side, and the water jumps when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to treatment: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract the moisture entirely from outside. After constraining the fractures of bandages and powders, and put wine and oil, and leave them like that until the fifth day;
then undo it, and treat the wound with dressings and with anointments, and let the head be constrained, and give to eat to the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another manner of incision is that you look at the size of the abscess, and the gathering of the pus;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes it is behind; sometimes it is on the right; and sometimes it is on the left.
Cut then the place where the abscess appears, and the filling of the pus, and make the incision according to that which you have the power;
and beware that you do not cut the artery; and stop the flow of blood, so that the patient dies from lack of blood and from evacuation of moisture.
When there is a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the chest, and the disease is chronic, and the treatment with medicine is of no benefit, then the last resort is cauterization with what one cuts the two arteries.
It is necessary, then, when you cut the veins, that the patient make his head fall back; after rubbing the limb with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, then the patient tightens his neck against the entire cloth; then look where the vein is visible, and the limbs of one and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly raised;
Then mark the limbs from the beginning, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula on both sides, as far as the vertebrae reaches to the bone, and that which is through the wide wound of the head.
And if you see, remove the spatula from beneath the artery and cut above, carving just as the two veins across.
And when the vein is cut, then let the blood flow out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not appear to feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark from the beginning and make until the bone;
and that which is necessary to put blood flowing if it is six and a fraction, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery;
then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone a pointed syphac, if the abscess does not heal, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
of emigraine When ancient migraine comes, and sharp caterization, because of the moistures of tears and the heat on the temples and old forehead weakness and similar things, and it is treated by means of medical cures and all that does not profit him, then we cauterize the arteries of the temples and do the cauterization, as we have related.
And the manner of the extraction of them is that the patient makes to raise the hairs of his temples, and attend to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is hardly found outside in some men who are too cold;
and if it is replaced, then remove the patient's neck from certain bandages, then rub the limb with a coarse cloth, and raise the limb with warm water as long as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the shape: then scratch the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then pull it up with pincers, and separate it well from the tendons that are attached to each part;
and if the artery is subtle, then turn it at the point of the nail, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two heads. For if it is not cut, then know that the blood does not stop at all.
And let the blood flow for six hours, up to three times;
and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with two threads of strong double silk thread, which will prevent it from coming undone before the closure of the wound, and will come to be stopped by the blood;
Then remove the excess hair that is between the two lips in that same hour, and then, if you see it, if the cautery of the cautery iron has reached the bone as long as the head is removed;
and it is the mother of work, if the patient has no fever and he is of a hot complexion. For the cauteries are helped in finishing the ulcers: because it is of greater aid to the ulcers.
Or it is necessary for the extraction of the arteries that one fills the body with old cotton and puts it on well-made tents;
and when one removes them, let them be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until they are healthy;
and without cutting the artery as long as you work, if you have to cut with a knife by cautery, or you fill the body with vitriol and strain it with your hand so that the blood is congealed; and if you don't have a remedy at hand, then put your finger on the spot until the blood is congealed, and raise the limb from cold water as long as the blood stops, and hold it steady as is necessary;
And there should be between the two incisions one finger of space, and then when you have signed to enclose the two limbs, and you put the iron burning on until it comes near the bone, and cut the vein in two limbs; and should be loosened between the two parts for it is not suitable to be tightened by this cautery everywhere.
and it is the form of the cautery:
and that which is more moderate in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting on both sides, but the cutting be well spaced to withstand the heat for a longer time. For when the extremities are too thin, they hold less heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are on the outer skin of the head, and no medical treatment is beneficial, and you see the face of the patient become red, and feel the forehead with numbness as if from frost; and the eyes are tender and moist so that the hair of the papers is burned, and the papers are scorched, and charred by the heat of the tears, thus there is need for this treatment. And the ancients called it "bruised cure", and it is that you make on the patient who has this illness the hairs that he has on the forehead, then make three equal cuts on the forehead according to its length;
And the ancients called it "bruised cure", and it is that you make on the patient who has this illness the hairs that he has on the forehead, then make three equal cuts on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the cuts be as if two fingers in the middle of the forehead going downwards to the nose, and the other two on either side of the head above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on either side of the head above the papers;
and direct your hand from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers at the joint across.
and prepare a piece of sponge and much of cloth for sucking the blood, then push the spitulum sharply with two parts of the body where it is in the form:
of the incision that is above the temple just to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two fissures to the entire surface which is on the bone, then make another cut of the middle incision just to the other second, and then extract this spitulum. if you push into the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellaire", and it is very well cutting on one side, and on the other side is soft, not cutting, and this is its form:
And put the cauterized part cutting towards the flesh near the heart, and the cauterized part touching towards the bone, and the swelling as far as it comes to the middle split.
And cut off the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision is continuous up to what opens from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle split up to the other side;
and then extract equally from the blood, and press the limb for the blood taken;
then put in each split a piece of old cotton, and put on moistened cloths in wine and in oil and in vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not come;
and on the third day untie the linen, and apply a great plaster of hot water, then the treatment of the wound with basilicon oil, and other treatments that one cures wounds, until it is healed.
When in any case one has an acute cataract with severe symptoms, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and the sight weakened, and the eyelids scorched; and the hair falls out, and the head is deeply pained with sharp pain, and the patient is in anguish; then you should know by these accidents that those matters and that cataract does not come from many veins, and the remedy is what it is, if it is so.
And you instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one two fingers wide. And begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; and disengage your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain;
and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then probe between the two lips of the wound and put in a lot of cotton, and bind with linen; then apply warm dressings moistened with wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
when it is inflamed, it is necessary that you rub the bone as long as the flesh begins to grow, then treat it with caustic things, which cause flesh to grow.
In a similar way: take two parts of flowers of centaury, and four parts of colonchine, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to induce flesh growth throughout.
of the stopping of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: Oats, or beasts, or stone from a mine or similar things such as iron; or seeds, like jasper, fava beans, peas; or flowing things such as sharpness and acids and similar things.
When there is a stone in the ear or another kind of thing that does not belong to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, then distill a portion of violet oil or oil of cypress, then apply it for extraction; and have the person sneeze from the nostrils, and stop their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and stop the ear with wax.
Many times fever comes from this treatment;
and if it does not come out, then one must perform an extraction with subtle pincers, from which this is the method:
If it comes out to the pincers, that's good;
if not, then perform an extraction with a subtle hook of small doubles;
and if it does not come out by that, then make a thread of silver and push the head of the thread through the hole of the ear strongly, and stop up what is around the thread with wax so that the veins cannot enter with the thread; then pull it out forcefully, for many times it comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come out in that manner, then take some glue and take the veins, and put some instrument which has a point for that purpose, and put a little cotton around; Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull strongly.
And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear as well as the abscess is hot and swollen, and spasms;
and the manner of the cutting is that you first let blood from the patient's head, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or dependent flesh; and let the cut be as wide as a coin, until you reach the stone, then extract the bone according to your power, and suck hastily with your mouth;
and treat it until it is healthy.
And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot come out, then apply the spatula with a subtle touch according to this form: and administer an incision on that grain.
But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then extract with subtle pinces and with sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
In the case then that there is a discharge in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use a first dressing of conditioners, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let them be placed on that same ear where the discharge is. If it flows out by itself, it's good.
If this is not so, then take many stones according to the length of your hand and hold them lightly, and heat them a little by the fire; and put the patient's finger in or through his ear, and rub on this side of his feet from another part, and make friction with one foot on the foot that is by the ear; and do not stop rubbing foot against foot until the disease has entirely gone, and thus the health is entirely restored;
and if you see that, then take a reed, and put one of the ends in the ear, and the other end is pressed by fire until the hottest part of the reed is burnt;
then do the same with other reeds until the disease has entirely gone, as we have said in the beginning.
In the extraction of a beast, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section;
but if it is of large size so that one can feel it, then administer the extraction of splinters; and it is the lightest thing to remove what is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you perform the treatment as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment is not beneficial, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if there appear no worms, then treat them as subtle splinters, and if they are not visible, then take the chain of what is its form:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And put the thinnest part in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck firmly on all the chain; do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, then stuff cotton into the cavity as I have said in the previous chapter;
And if they do not come out forcibly as we have said, then administer distillations that the old ones have experienced in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations;
and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear with all this equipment, of which this is the form as you see: And let it be of silver or of brass, straining through the small holes, and above, covers for distilling;
and for pressing within the distillation the instrument of brass well made for this purpose, and if you see take the rag and envelop it around the pointed end with cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and that which you see of your medicines into the cavity, and let the cane be in the ear;
Then thrust your fingers inside the armpit to the bottom of the socket, and press your hand firmly so that the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and let the patient feel inside, and let the distillation be heated by the fire in the same way that it is distilled in the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the stopping up of the ears
No child is born who does not have a passage in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men due to blockage of a wound, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes go deep into the ear, so that one cannot see them;
and sometimes it happens that the hole is stopped up, and one sees it very well.
That which comes from deep within, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many conditions, and in that which one sees, it is necessary that you put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opilation apparent, if the work has all this spatula from which is the form:
And let it be sharp and cutting at the front and back all even, so that it does not harm the ear;
if the opilation is of flesh or body of the ear, if you hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, until that flesh is all removed.
And if the opilation is deep within the ear, take a subtle rasp lightly and heat it a little by the fire, then put it into the body of the ear.
If you suspect an obstruction where the patient feels pain in the ear, touch gently, and be careful not to press on the nerves of the ear;
then put in the ear a tent made from the width of the perforation, and the stopper in the Egyptian ointment. Do this on no day when the wound is sore, or take a tent and the stopper in vinegar and rose water, and powder with burnt vitriol;
and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you pull out the tent and put in another moistened one made from a cerate of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is reduced; then treat it until it is healthy.
And if a flow of blood comes, then dip a sponge in cold water and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that reduce the flow of blood which are described in the treatment of distillations.
It is a remedy that comes in pimples of the eyes when they are moist and dry, so you must stretch them with tweezers and pinces, and cut the head of a spatule from its roots; then put on the limb a glassy ointment spread.
And if it does not heal by itself, then the cauterization of subtle lenticy should be done with fire, and the cauterizer after the incision is of no value;
and many times repair, when none of these things remain at their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then their roots are burned and do not regrow.
of the gum Many times there come in pimples of the eyes a thing that seems like gum in its form and hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "gravel", and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelid. The works are such:
The works are such: it is necessary to know if the swelling changes on one side and the other, and it is an easy thing to know;
feel then the thickness of the skin, afterwards scratch off each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cut it.
if you cannot cut it without piercing a little the skin, do not grievously harm the patient;
and if the wound is large, then assemble it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed;
and if it is small, do not apply any pressure, for the organs will restore themselves at once and join together.
And if the swelling descends inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the skin, and stretch the swelling with pincers, and cut and press it on one side and the other;
and if the plaster is removed by cutting, it does not cause any grief;
and when the stone is cut, if you raise the eyelid of the salty eye, and treat the limb of whoever urinates blood so much that the patient becomes healthy.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is discharged in threads from the skin of the eyelids, and this happens more to children than to grown people, and causes them great pain in their eyes, and they get the discharge in the morning, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes;
and for this reason they often lie on their faces, and sleep on them, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are found to be moist with the discharge and the appearance that the exinach has covered the eye. And when you press the limb with your fingers and feel the excrescence between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in your hands;
and then take a piece of linen, and prepare a dressing in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the excrescence on each part, then put it on him; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the excrescence is gathered within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture on the spatula a cutting edge of such width, and not more wide than the wound one makes on the vein;
and make the flesh deep until you come to the excrescence; and in many cases the excrescence comes from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract then a piece of cloth from the middle to the fingers, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as long as it is sparse;
and beware that you do not put in the gap, that you do not reach the whole spatula to the hole, that you do not blow on it.
And if the bone does not appear at the beginning of the gap, then increase the gap slightly until it appears;
then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and in water, and put on the wound, and bind with bandages.
And if it is one of those men who break the seal and put on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Then cure him as long as he is healthy.
And if hot abscess comes to the wound, then cure with warm poultices until it is healed.
The hairs of the papers When in the papers hairs grow joined to other than their nature, and are inflamed, thus they harm the eyes, and bring many kinds of sickness such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so that it is a cause of destruction of the eyes;
and the cure is according to four methods: or with cauterization assembled fire, or with sharp medicine according to what is stated in the chapter on cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by branding, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your lap, then take the paper of the eye with your left hand;
if it is converted, it is good; if not, then I push a needle to all the thread below; and let it be within the margin of the skin where the hairs grow among these hairs, and pull the thread to the bottom across all the skin, and turn it to the scraper;
then make in the part below the skin, below the hairs joined, all the spatula coping, from the large laceration to the small;
then extract the thread, and put below the skin a small piece of cotton and of cloth, then sign on the skin a figure of ink, such as the leaf of myrtle, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the skin which is divided in pieces.
And if it happens that one must cut a large quantity of the skin according to that which the skin is softened;
then make on all the spatula along the two lines that you have signed, and start from the large wound to the small; and let it be one of the natural cracks near the hairs in the thickness of a root, then cut the onion at one of the two angles of the heart, then scratch everything;
then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle and all thread of subtle wool, and suck the blood, and make dry the excess threads on the two eyebrows with any sticky things, if you want to do this;
and if not, then I have no cure, then leave the stitching and the threads until three or four days;
then cure the wound without stitching of dry and constricting things, for the skin will heal by itself due to the soothing of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitching is bad (as the ancients said), and this is a work without fear; and if in another way:
and if in another way: and it is that you show the parchment of a figure which is as the liver of the martyr, as we have related, to three ounces of the mixture according to the form that is here:
then scrape off what surpasses the small equal forces according to the form that is here:
And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle or thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put another thread through the large arm, and the second thread through the small one, and join the two threads equally between them;
then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have made a sign, as we have related, then join the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healthy;
and if an abscess comes to a cutting, thus the dressing of wax and similar adjustments soothing;
and often it happens that the hair of the papillae are converted:
if it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the papillae and the thread within according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two subtle threads as long as the papillae and the width of the spatula is; and cut at the two heads of the two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly on what overcomes the papillae of the eye, and stretch the two wounds of the two parts forcibly; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin that is held tight will die and become black and decay, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, if the wound has strong forces, then heal the skin as long as it is healthy;
and when the wound is sucked, and if the skin is lifted, and no longer pricks the hair;
and it is the shape of the two canthi that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width;
The work is such that you take a fine needle, and put in it a thread of soft and fine silk; then assemble the heads and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm of length;
then arrange in the flesh another subtle thread of silk quickly, and tie the head of the two threads;
Then put the patient's head in a warm place;
and let it be warmed by the sun so that the work may be clarified, for this is a subtle and minor work, then take the needle and push it all the way into the root of the hair next to the skin, and make it pierce the skin sufficiently until you pull it out from above the natural hair;
then extract the hair up to the flesh, and push into the flesh that same hair, if there is one or two or three or several;
then remove your hand so that the hairs come out entirely from the flesh into the skin with the natural hair.
And if the flesh is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the flesh downwards with all the thread that you have ordained, until the flesh comes out from the hole and so that you see it by the sight of the eye;
Then you will thread the needle and the string, and close the eye and let it be for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and the flesh grows.
and if the hairs are small, accompany one hair with a longer one from the natural eyebrows, and let it be with the one you leave, until it is elongated and then lift it.
from the decay of the eye When this disease which is called "alexandrion" or decay of the eye comes into the eye, it does so in two ways:
one being natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from a cauterization, and from similar things.
And the manner of the work is that you cut the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tendons of linen, and lift them until they are healed;
and it is not suitable that you use it in the treatment of things that are dried and constrained. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first one;
but it has an effect on softening things, such as figwort; and the rose of aqua or teasel and seeds of flax being cooked, and poultices of yew tree melted in any of the oils, and it envelops a tent, and cures this.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care that it not become sour according to the form it had beforehand;
and these works that we have said are not aids against this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it had beforehand.
This illness which is dislocated, truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from a wound and a cut and a cauterization and similar things;
and the way of the work on it is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and the stitch in the flesh, and you make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the thread comes out at both sides of the flesh;
then is the flesh sewn over the threads, and the skin is cut with a wide spatula. And if the shape of the wound returns to what it should be, it's good;
if not, then take a rasp and put it in the cut, and turn the skin, and make two cuts on either side of the skin;
and let the head of the two fractures of the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has no "I griesche
then sew that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are adjusted from what follows the wound, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen.
then apply the treatment for what we have said regarding softening medicines, and of tents, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a fracture or from a wound or from a burn, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision under the hairs of the skin, and according to what is seen before; then separate between the two lips of a wound, as I have said;
then separate between the two lips of a wound, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare everything so that they can make the body return to its natural shape;
and the patients themselves, according to what they need in terms of work and instruments in various conditions.
When this swelling comes to men in such a way that the knee is swollen with white stuff, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor under the knee, and lift it up;
and stretch it to pinches, until you cut what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patients cannot suffer that the too sharp spatula does not injure the eye;
and let your incision be such that you lightly scrape away the assembled [tissue], so that the skin regrows according to its natural form;
and it heals all the assembled [tissue], and sometimes forms in the oily bitter sauce, and the sweet oil rises from the bile;
then put between the skin and the oil a layer of flax, and put on the oil wet wool in abundance of eggs; and after three days use sweet bile and hot things until it is healed.
Know that the anointing is in two ways: one is nervous and similar to a hard skin, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to a white, frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and cuts the flesh with pincers, it cannot feel;
and one and the other symptom worsens towards the great eye, and increases little by little until it covers the entire sight and the entire light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head on a tray, then covers their eyes; and raises the paper with one hand, then wraps the finger with small bandages, and stretches it to the opposite side; then takes a needle, and puts in it the hair of a horse, or of a cow, or of an ox, and strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and sticks it in the finger, and pierces it with the entire needle, and ties the finger with a thread and stretches it to the opposite side, and scrapes all the hair from the side of the finger which holds the thread and the needle next to the skin just to the head, then cuts the remaining part at the root of the eye with all subtle spatula and small forces, and lets the natural flesh or the eye, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears excessively;
and sometimes the nail sticks to the anvil solely, and to the thread, as we have said; then one scrapes all the spatula from the softness of which this is the form:
And beware that the spatula does not touch the thin tissue and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced;
and after the incision put in the oil a little of melted lead, and made from litharge, and let it stay until the next day; then cure what is needed so that it becomes healthy.
And if the nail is not sensitive, and you cannot push in the needle, and the nails cannot enter, often this type of nail is cured with medications;
and grow as I have described in the section, and if you see it covered, then open the oil of the disease, and take the spatula gently a little sharp according to this form: And rub the unction gently underneath, and if you see that it lessens a little and the reason presses upon, then distill from your mouth into the oily colic made of litharge and red colic, and boil the oil until the other hour;
If nothing is contrary in the oil, then as with a hot abscess, treat it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healthy, then resume the work as before, until it is healthy.
then resume the other work according to this same operation, as long as it is all bone.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is hindered in the oil by great hindrance, then stop at the elbow, and cut one part and not too much, so that no harm comes from it;
Then distill in the red oil-collier which is made from litharge.
In the eyes of some men there grows a red flesh, and covers the tonsil and hangs over the palate and the uvula to the throat, and resembles a rose of baluster.
and the work of it is that the patient puts his head in a warm place, then opens the eyes, and takes out all that flesh with sharp instruments suitable for that purpose, and holds it with force;
then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting to the root until the end, and beware that you do not touch the oil to the working place;
and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the ankle and small forces which one calls ostesebel, according to the form shown after this chapter where it is demonstrated;
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is cut, then apply the oil of distilled broom or you distill red collier and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the wound cotton with vinegar of eggs, so that it is assured to be free from apostema heat;
and if nothing remains, and the blood is cold and dominates, and you suspect hot apostema, then leave the oil and treat the apostema with things that appease the hot apostema;
then return to your work as long as he is healthy, and thus do as many times the flesh is adjusted in the oil by this similarity.
But nevertheless it is necessary that you alleviate the treatment of each weak oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and take away its function and weaken the eye all days.
It is necessary first that you examine the eye, in which it is, if it is strong, and there is no other disease besides the cataract; then bind the eye in a similar manner:
instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then press those veins all along the shoulder according to his wisdom, and let the shoulders be subtle and double according to this form:
And let there be two shoulders of equal size on the body according to this form:
then bind the forces of those veins subtly, and suck the blood from one hour to another, until you see the veins moving again outside of the eye;
and beware that you do not block the eyes at the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not cut except those veins;
and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the cataract.
And if you are not able to collect all of it in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with things that ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some hours until the pains are eased and the abscess is assured by warm application, then begin again according to this method which is described beforehand until it is healed;
and these are the forms of the fractures:
The physician calls them "arista" fistulas:
When you treat them with cautery and burning medicine according to what I have previously said, and it is not healed, then a hole is made in it where you cut into the abscess, there where it should be drained, and all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then you scrape away all the instrument of which it is formed;
and it is called "rough head", and it should be made from iron to the rough edge, and should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the bone of the corrupted flesh, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption has been scraped;
and do this sometimes, then restore the place with medicines that expel.
if the places are swollen, and there is a tumor, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not suppurate and is not an abscess, and no bad accident comes, know that he is healthy;
if this is not so, then there is another trick to bring the fistula to the womb of the kidney according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is discovered, then take the iron according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the staff be tapered up to the head as you see here:
then put it on the bone of the arm, and remove your hand from the shoulder a little, then turn the iron all around until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by that which comes out if he puts his hand on his kidney;
and then restore the limb with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh becomes calloused and hardened, thus one sees the matter at the kidney; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open from all sides, and there is no discharge to the kidney, nor thinning, then it is necessary that you read to the patient;
then apply the plaster, then put warm poultices or hot irons to cause sweating, then apply to the eye a plaster made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and apply a dressing on top of bandages and of cloths;
and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and fold each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs;
Then strain by means of a hard bandage above, and reestablish the veins to prevent them from being struck.
Then let out the veins and keep the eye constrained by day and night, and if the limbs become swollen, it is necessary that you constrain them a lot;
Then untie the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see the eye getting better, it's good;
If it isn't so; If you reapply the plaster and the dressings and untie the bandage and the veins until he is healthy.
of the tearing of the web of the membrane When there is a disruption in the membrane, then it opens, and comes forth a flow of papers like a grain of resin, and it is terrible to see;
Then if you cover the membrane, the work is such that you put a needle in the root of the part below next to the skin above, then put another needle where it has the double thread of the part of the armier; and have it pierced, and let the first needle according to the condition;
then cut the thread of double wire and tie a part of the vein around, and constrict it well, then remove the needle and put on the ointment moistened in abundance;
and let it be until the threads cling to the vein, then treat the wound with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and often the wound is constrained by the vein, each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eye has great appearance, then prick at the subtle spatula which comes from the depth of the oil, and rub the moist albuginea and descend the eye, and enter in as much as;
then remove it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not other than a boil that assembles in the eye, resembling a descending fig, and it is not a fig.
and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it as much as you see the boil coming out to your eyes; then be it fixed, and let it not descend and be the light disordered, and let the patient see things as he usually does;
and if it does not descend below, know that it is a fig, and if the descending of the boil is not prepared as we have said.
make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make it on the corner of the eye a little by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corner of the eye and the cornea, as long as the boil is there;
and when it is dislocated, if it is distilled into the oil of warm water, or of warm bath or decoction, and the bandage is applied, then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
of the warmth of the oil We have seen the similarities of the warmth in the division, and that which is necessary to pierce through; if one works according to health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from the light of the sun, and anoint them with healthy oil and bind it very tightly;
then put the cloth of the oil on your left hand if their eye is on the left, or on your right hand if their eye is on the right;
then take in your right hand, if their eye is on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if their eye is on the right;
Then put the point of the instrument within the crown by the thickness of a straw in the white part of the eye at the place of the lesser artery, then push the instrument that is called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand as much as it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing;
and it is necessary that the measurement of the path of almagda be at the depth of the measurement of the space which is from the plum to the end of the blackness; and it is the crown of the eye;
if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the torn web, and then put the instrument as far as the vein is, then press another path after another.
if the vein descends now, then the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a brief rest, and if the pain returns by the second path, put the staff with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not ascend, extract it gently in a circular motion with your hand little by little;
and then put back into the pain a bit of gum seed, and raise from that the inner oil. Then put by means of a spoon the oil stupes or liniment moistened in rose oil and in abundance of use, and apply with the healthy oil.
We, and those who are of our condition, put on the common broth with an abundance of use.
And if the gum cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
And then pierce the conjunctive gently, and do not go too deep, but make the subtle limb, then apply the ointment, as we have said;
and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient the comfortable bed, so that he sleeps on his back in the dark room;
and let him avoid all movements, and take light foods, and not turn his head to the right or to the left, and let him be laid according to his condition until the third day;
then untie him in the same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see certain things, and then put him on a diet until the seventh day;
and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you alleviate this, because the fever rises quickly.
Abscesses of the sides come, that you loosen the nail before the seventh day, and the dressing of what cures the abscess;
and when it is appeased, if you loosen the vein and put on its place a gold leaf to cover any day, and be then in that dark house.
And then goes out of the house little by little, and converts into its conditions;
and knows that no disciples should intervene in this case. And one came to us who was from the Iraq, who told us that in his country they made a medicine called almond milk, with which one sucks the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any of it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of almagra, because those who do not know them see.
and are of urine properly: And are the head of the bones of this same subtlety, and the skin in three angled corners.
Certain times there grow in the kidneys various fatty growths, from which there are some that seem like scorpions at the base of the feet;
and if it has such or it has flesh with an entrenched black color, and if it has flesh of a swollen brown color. In this case then of these growths which is swollen, and not entrenched, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;
In this case then of these growths which is swollen, and not entrenched, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open its nostrils, and throw the oil on those growths, and rub them with warm. Then consider that you must sustain the subtle sharp point of a part, as long as you know that this instrument is entirely bony.
And if anything remains that cannot be covered, then open it to all the subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and let it heal by itself, or apply a warm poultice, and drain the fluid as needed;
and if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize the wound as much as possible until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned, then apply either vinegar or wine. If the wound opens, and pus comes to the palate, know that it is infected;
and if pus does not come out as needed, know that there is a dead flesh in the bone above, for which reason the instruments do not come to cut it;
Then it is necessary that you put a thread of flax, not too thick, and let it be known by us, and have between each knot a space of one finger or less; and put the patient's head in the thread to his nostril so he can smell it, and pull it through as long as it comes out through the nostril inside the mouth;
and many times this is taught to the child in schools, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
then hold the end which comes out through the nostril in one hand, and the other end which comes out through the mouth in the other hand, and pull one after the other while we are on the thread.
Do this until you see that the knots have consumed that flesh, then pull out the threads, suck the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nostrils as before;
Make it burn for three days or more, as long as the ligaments consume all that remains of flesh;
and then put on a plaster of pounded herbs for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of dry medications, use them;
and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which one distills the oils and the medications;
And let it be of silver or copper, similar to a covered lamp, like a chain, and its conductors;
and if you see, make a closed chain, and let the instruments be flat to purge the head;
and have a handle at the top to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
of the flesh on the nose
Many times a disease born in the head from the nose, which is called "telul", grows and increases greatly, until it becomes visible to the sight;
and for this reason it is necessary that you cut to the beginning, and remove all dead tissue, then apply the cautery or the burning medicine;
and let it be covered until it becomes large, if taken in time if it is hard, of fixed color, of little sensation:
if not the iron instrument touches it because it is an hidden abscess, for when one cuts into it sometimes, a great evil comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can cover it all, then warn the patient and cut with fear, and treat the place with dry and restraining things.
Be aware that when a flow of discharge comes from one of these cartilaginous operations, it profits little, unless in some men.
It is necessary then when it happens to anyone, if one examines whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then one brings the two lips together for a stitch, then cures it until it is healthy;
and if the lips are separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you cauterize all the parts of the wound until they heal, then bring the two lips together for a stitch, and constrain them, and powder with powder of blood of dragon, and burnt incense; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of Paris or other warming plaster, and let it be until it adheres by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healthy.
The manner of the stitch is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; By thread, as I have made you know.
of the abscesses of the lips
To men have between the lips an abscess hard, similar to grains of beans, and smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you pierce the lips, and cut into each knot, and take them with pincers and cut in each part;
then put in the brain after the incision of the vitriol broth, until the blood is congealed;
and then apply the liver of arsenic, and treat the brain with dry things until it is healed.
Many times a flesh grows on the gums unevenly, which the old people call "albulus";
if it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the bone or the blood flow;
Then put on the limb a vitriol broth, or other powders that are astringent and desiccative;
and if the flesh grows back after the incision, and often happens, if it covers a second time, and requires cauterization: if it does not grow back after the cauterization;
Some times they gather at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and worm-eaten, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth is stinking;
if it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and take the teeth or the scabs in your hands, until nothing remains; and thus make from the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and the other stains, as long as they are moist;
and if one removes that which is in the first layer, it is good; if not, then proceed to the second layer and the third, until you have everything resolved;
and know that the tooth has need of various forms of instruments for scraping, according to what the work requires, because the rasp that one uses to scrape the teeth have other forms than those that one uses between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat a tooth for its pain that you delay as long as you can, for one should not do it hastily; for it is a very high substance, thus one has no excuse for removing it.
Therefore when the patient is constrained by the pain of the injury, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth that is ailing. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and makes them pull out the good tooth; and however the pain does not depart from that, as long as the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already seen it be done by these surgeons;
and when you are well certain of the ailing tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with all the spatula strongly to guard the gum on all sides;
then put your fingers or subtle pincers at the first knock and knock, until it is well loosened, then I affirm the pincers well; and let the head of the patient be in your teeth between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part, and move it as you have done previously.
And if the tooth is perforated and fragile, then it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, where the holes are; and if you extract it subtly with the tongs, so that it does not break when extracting;
and it is necessary to be very careful in opening around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And it is good to beware that you do not break it, and leave a piece behind, and cause the patient greater pain from the root of the bad tooth than from the first one.
And beware that you do not make a mess like the ignorant surgeons do, who through their hastiness and hardness sometimes break the jaw, and do not consider what we have stated;
But sometimes they come from the injection of a serious disease through the roots that remain, or from the cartilage that it breaks, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is decayed, then wash the area with wine or vinegar and soap;
and if a flow of blood comes from it, which often happens, then apply to the area a mixture of vitriol broth;
and if that is not effective, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the scrapers, where one grinds the teeth first, should be long and pointed and thick handles, so they do not bend when you grind the tooth;
and these are the forms: And should be of thick metal so that they do not bend when grinding, and should be of well-made iron, and should have teeth to hold the handle.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the socket, it is necessary that you put on the spot a moist cotton cloth, one or two hours, until the gums are softened, then you push the teeth which are called "algefri", from which the gum seems to be pulled.
and let them be made sharp like a file and that is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these instruments, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a pelican, of which this is the shape:
And let it be strong and large so that it does not break my tooth, and if the root jumps out by itself, it is good;
if it does not, then you aid yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come here after:
And if one is aided by this instrument which has two handles, because of its shape: and other instruments that are in the front for the purpose of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, because of its shape:
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many dental instruments are; and also other instruments which are not mentioned;
and the wise masters find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are some diseases where the ancient ones did not teach the use of an instrument because of the diversity of the ills and it breaks or cracks the flesh or other bones, or it decays, if one seeks the instruments that one needs, which I have told you, and aids with gestures, because of its shape:
And let them be thick and well-suited to hold the bone, that it does not shatter, but can be held and supported;
and then restore the limb with suitable medicines for that, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, thus the bone will regain its entire instrument:
When the teeth appear not in accordance with the natural body, and their form is ugly, and especially in women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is born after the other tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot soothe it or file it:
then the root; and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and is made of iron pointed at the end:
And cut a little and a little with the forceps in the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a file suitable for its form:
and it is like the file with which one makes the nails;
and files the tooth a little and a little with light hands gently, so that it does not move until it dries;
then one smooths the surface at the end of any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, it is necessary to file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When the front tooth aches, either from percussion or from cold, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you treat them with medicines that tighten, and this is of no value;
if it is necessary to constrain it with a thread of gold, because the silver threads turn green and decay, but the gold does not move;
and let the thread be moderately sized, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth;
and if you want to thread the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the ends between the unhealthy teeth, if there is one or several, until you come sensibly just to the healthy tooth on the other side; then reapply the covering just to the part where you started, and withdraw your hand subtly and sensibly, so that it does not move at all;
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the ends of the thread to one nail, and assemble them, and pass them between the healthy tooth, and put it so that it does not bite the tongue;
and then let it be constricted as much as it can stay in place, and if it becomes undone, or the threads are broken, then constrain it with another thread;
if it stays in place and serves thus all its tension, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two jaws, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place, freshly, just as we have said;
and do not interfere with it, for one who is not wise and suffers, and sometimes makes the form of a tooth from the bone of an animal, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and constricts it as we have said, and it stays and serves thus for a long time.
Sometimes there are ligatures that come from beneath the tongue or from the nature, which one is born with; from an accidental deep wound;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your hand, and lift his tongue;
then cut the large nerve thread, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if it has hardness or swelling, and it is a sudden wound, so cut the ligament and cut from the length that which holds it;
and beware that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is nearby;
and when you have done it, lift up the leg of the patient with rosiness and ease, or with coldness, then put near the tongue a piece of linen;
and tie the patient's hands every night, so that they cannot get up.
And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the leg a warm broth of vitriol; and if he is without sense, then one should cauterize with the slow cautery, which is good for that. then heal with another healing until he is healthy,
and if you see the flesh of a color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer;
and if it is declining into phlegm, and there is moisture, then one should purge the humidity, and make a subtle spit, and deliver from one side and the other; and if he is without sense due to your work, then put on him a mixture of vitriol until he is restrained, then return to your work as long as you treat everything thoroughly;
then lift the limb from clay and from seat, and heal with other healings until he is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes there come within the throat sores called "godath", and they are properly named the II amandres, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take heed:
if it is a hard abscess of small size and of dark color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also because of the flow of blood; but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will remove it, or it would burst by itself;
and if it is of white color and round, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument for cutting, but first take care that the abscess is warm and at rest.
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his hands be in your hand, and open his mouth and press the tongue under with all the instrument, because this is the form.
and let it be of silver or of subtle iron, as are surgeon's knives:
When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and the thread in the hand, and thrust it through above more than you can.
and thrust some thing of the towels with it, then cut it with the instrument, because this is the form, that seems a violent force; and all of these are curved, and one is different from the other, and are very sharp, and are made of iron or of steel:
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then cut with the nail, because this is the form: And let there be a cut on one side, and a name on the other side;
and when you have cut one of the veins, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and vinegar, and if there is discharge of blood, gargle the patient, or cooked corks of green apples, or fumes of myrtle, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then anoint the cure as long as it is healthy;
and sometimes there arise in the throat other abscesses besides the two veins, so cut them thus like the two veins equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had arisen inside her throat, to be sure, the abscess of the small sense;
and it had well taken and closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was obstructed, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she had remained thus for one day or two.
And the abscesses were so raised that they had put two threads through the two openings of the nostrils.
I probed then so much, and stuck in one of the corners, then pulled out the thread, and with it a large portion of pus;
then I put another thread in the other opening of the nostril, and I opened the mouth and pressed the tongue;
after that I stuck the corner in these abscesses, and I tapped on one part, and nothing came out but a little blood; and then the mucus of the woman's throat was loosened, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease to cut into that abscess for a long time;
and the abscesses grew back again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until they became very large;
Then I burned and cauterized inside the throat: unless it stays without growing;
and may I be separated from these parts, and not be but what God made of them after me.
of the egg
When the humors descend to the egg, and it is inflamed and it is long, it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is disordered thick and round, it is called "egg".
When it is purified as we have said in the division, and the purification does not benefit me, and you see that the ulcers of the abscesses are soothed, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it.
and that which is round and gathered and is not lengthy; and it is bloody or of a reddish color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger to the patient.
It is necessary then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned before; then insert the needle into the egg, and pull it out, and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two glands.
And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut too much, it hurts the voice, and the speech;
and after the incision, use the ointment that we have mentioned in the incision of the two glands, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient has a fear of being burned, it is necessary that you use art in the cauterization of their fearful sensation.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp and pointed. And it is that the patient puts their head in your lap, and then you press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and constricts it with a living sharp rod, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and then you fill the handle of this instrument, according to its shape:
And have at the head a little tube where one puts the medicine, such as the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument all over the medicine on the pipe;
and the patient is sitting on their side, so that the saliva and mucus run from their mouth with the medicine inside, so that it does not go down the throat, and at the bladder;
Then hold your hand on the medicine and press on the egg, the quantity of a half an hour, until you see it become numb and the mortifications of the medicine be alleviated;
and if you see it, take cotton and envelop it with some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument all around the cotton on the chain above, until the cotton adheres to the egg;
and do this often, until the cautery is perfected, then let it dry, and apply after 4 days or 5.
And if you have need to restart the cautery of the medicine, restart it, and after the cautery, clean around the egg, with cotton embedded in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine;
and be aware of cold water, and be cured of gargling as long as it is healthy.
This treatment is safer than incising, nor is it cauterization;
If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and artemisia and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put in a seat, and make boil;
and the pot should be well plugged with strong earth, and inside the pot there should be an instrument made in this manner: And let it be of silver or of lead, and let one of the ends be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise to the eye through the vein, until the eye is mortified;
After the recovery often happens, until the eye is dry, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and not to make the same heat as for the treatment of an abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and put inside the top a tuft of wool, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the tuft of wool does not let the greasy vapour reach the mouth, and it is a good remedy for health together.
Many times it happens to the throat or spine or fishbone, or some other thing;
so it is necessary that you pull what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing clearly;
and what does not appear and is thrown back into the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; By chance the thing happens through vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of Turnsol, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie to the sponge a thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the stomach, it will be felt, and then pull strongly;
and if it does not come out from what we have said, then take the instrument of a feather in this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and have the head elevated; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all of it be taken, nor push the bone inside;
and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because then it will be more or less according to what the thing is; If the swelling goes down, or it draws the instrument equally, as long as it is drawn.
of the blood of the throat
Certain times the blood is treated with medicine, as I have said in the section, through the treatment of remedies; and when that does not benefit me, then examine the throat of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
And if you see the blood, if it draws to all the small veins, or has subtle holdings that are worth that.
And if that is not worth it, take a heated iron, and insert it in the throat of the patient, then blow or draw from the iron the hot steam, and do this often. And if the patient has a fever throughout the day.
Then take a full view of the cold water, and open the mouth, and throw the throat back in swallowing, and move it with one's hand often; and if the blood vessels feel the cold, they congeal.
And if it does not coagulate as we have said, then suffocate the patient with arsentid, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the egg;
do this many times, because it will discharge without spitting.
And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are hot coals, and it be covered with a pierced cloth, and in this perforation be the head of the instrument;
then you give the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but goes to the blood vessels;
and let the blood flow now, and if it does not flow, then resume the fumigation many times;
and the patient suffers from thirst, and has salty and foul things in the mouth, and does not drink a drop of water;
and then it is necessary that it be forced out by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument through which the blood is drawn, is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs for entering into the throat; and it has a resemblance to a hawk's beak, and has roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot let go;
Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what memory recalls here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and in cutting;
and it is in two manners of which one is in its own likeness same, and from that which it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for the limbs where they are on the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if an abscess one should not pierce, as long as the bowel is thin according to its completion;
and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are thick, and do not thin according to their completion, like abscesses that are near the joints.
For when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets them be for a long time while they are purulent around, by chance the ligament and the nerve of the joint become corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member.
When the abscess is located on the main limb, and you delay the perforation until it becomes ripe, then it will not harm the main limb;
or when it is in the foundation, puncture it only when it is ripe;
and it is necessary that you puncture the abscess after complete digestion, except for the one that is in the foundation, so that it does not decay within, and be putrefied, and become elongated, and produce a fistula; and cannot heal in a short time.
And it is necessary that you know the time for puncturing the abscess which is ripe according to the completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the separation of the fever, and the diminishing of the pain and of the redness, and the decreasing of the swelling and of the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and it is necessary that you make a seat for the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens the muscles;
and let the perforation be of the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and in the veins and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no place for a poultice. In those that swell, according to whichever member.
And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is of value to leave the perforation as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce through the skin before that, the body will be poisoned by its venom, and will be full of much filth. and by chance they touch the lips and the depths of it.
And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need.
And it is necessary that you put small bandages on small abscesses, small perforations; and on large abscesses, large perforations, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the hair, and cauterize; when it has become so tender as a grape, and is numb, then it is necessary to do as one does with buboes:
and if there are such ones that are cut into three angles, and if there are such ones where one cuts as with the razor of a dead body, like abscesses of the entrails;
and if there are such ones where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce the skin plainly;
and it is necessary when the abscesses are large, and they collect a lot of pus, that you pierce them, so as not to drain all the pus at once, but rather drain a part of it; then press on the abscess up to the next day, then drain whatever comes out afterwards; do this many times, a little at a time, until all the pus has come out;
especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old and decrepit men. For the vein often bursts with the issue of the pus, which by chance kills the patient, and you are not aware of it.
End this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is small, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat cut, then put on dressings of linen or cotton wool; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put on each one a dressing so that they touch one against the other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or with a poultice of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it tightly for three days;
then anoint it, and treat it with oil until it is healthy.
And if evacuation of blood occurs in your work, then apply cold and watery water, and wet the cloth, and put it on the affected area many times.
And if the hemorrhage of blood persists, then apply governance and treatment, and the powders that I mentioned earlier in this book, and if it is during the season of winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then it is necessary to put on tents and moistened dressings with wine and hot oil;
and if it is in summer, and the limbs are fleshy, then it is necessary to put on moistened dressings with water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
and then dissolve the abscess and the pus, and treat it, as is necessary, until it is healthy;
And this is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses:
I have told you how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and see it in this chapter.
Or there are boils that come from the head, and they are manners of us that are in the thighs, just like the jousting of a kidney, and many have similarities to it.
It has fat and such things where there is moisture, just like in poules;
and if it has such things that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no point of doubt, then the artery does not make a contrary condition.
And the work of the waist is such that you examine all the instrument that is called "intestine", from which the shape comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then it flows through the thigh from the loin.
And when the moisture is evacuated, then it dries without leaving anything the skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing;
then plunge cotton into Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in vinegar and in oil, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those that run who have remained behind at night.
And then replace the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains of it;
then treat the wound with ointment suitable for it, until it is healthy.
And if the abscess holds a nut of fat, cut it according to this form, from the length; and cut your lancets, and scrape on all sides, and put all your treatment of drawing to the side where it lies;
and if the artery makes a constriction, do what I have told you afterwards.
And thus do for an abscess if it is pierced, and to cut and to cure as I have told you.
Cut into the pierced and moist abscess, if it is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if in some of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and of these abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman;
and found the abscess as hard as a rough, harsh and white stone, and could not break it. and if one had struck there, one would have made as good a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses coming on the head, except for those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be every hour at most dependent on the flow, so that the matter can issue.
and the treatment if as it suits
Many times there occur abscesses on the neck, and dislocations of the joints, and in the corners, and sometimes they come to another part of the body, and are many, and are intertwined one with another.
And each scrofula is properly within its own membrane, like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant which do not want to obey health.
in that one then which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each part and is not numb at the arms of the neck nor at the artery nor in the conduit, and is not perforated;
If it happens that you cut with a razor, and scrape each part, and the two lips of the wound are tender as a sore, then you are in this profession, as we have said regarding abscesses of the head;
and touch it a little and a little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and it is not the tendon nor the cutting edge, which the hands hold, and do not go too far forward, so you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and that does not stop the bleeding, then put on the wound burnt vitriol or some powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound; and let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to putrefy.
And when the blood is stanched, it returns to its work, until you complete it;
then look at your hand index if there remain small scrapes, if you collect and mend them.
And if there is in the root of the vein a large wound, it is not necessary that you cut that scrape at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang loose without harm;
then fill the old wound with cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
And if you cut the entire scrape, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no remaining surplus because of the size of the scrape. it is necessary that you undertake to cut at its root, and pull firmly, and sew it as we have said.
it is necessary that you undertake to cut at its root, and pull firmly, and sew it as we have said. Those scrophula that have an excess of flesh, prick where it appears to be open;
and prick it as the one mentioned before, in dependence, then I will treat with unction and similar things, so that it corrupts that which remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then the treatment with unction will begin to stick, until it becomes healthy.
The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land anyone who did it, and it is the writing of their word.
For those who have shivering, it is necessary that the cleft of the throat, which is called "epiglottis", be examined; and one should not trust in that, because all the veins and the part of the sickness are so that those who have abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaw.
When the disease is in the channel of the lung, it is necessary to remove the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, then, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we make a small incision of three or four circles, or a little cutting through, between the two rings or by the quantity of the cut of the surface, not in the cartilage.
and those veins are adjacent to the section of the epiglottis so that there is no point of cartilage, and the vessels are long with it.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to its full length, then cuts the kernel as far as it comes to the trachea. and let the blood vessels, if you see any thing, and then cut the surface, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the flesh of the knee, which jumps due to the leg that is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and let the wound be covered with a dressing.
And when the hour has passed for which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it gently without the cartilage;
then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Do not give this treatment unless the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and the defect is in the artery. Then cut through the epiglottis for that which the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death;
and for this reason the old ones command to let the wound be covered until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or in three, and then they command to cauterize the wound and treat, until it is cured;
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the tendons of her arm.
and I was called by the doctor, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from it, and it was clear that she had not cut a vein or a duct except for the throat, and the veins had flowed out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and treated her until she was healthy;
and had nothing but that the young woman was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition;
because I said that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no pain.
These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the colour of a jasmine, and it is very common in women;
and it occurs in two manners: natural, and accidental;
or natural does not cause a stranglehold.
And the accidental is in two manners, of which one is similar to a fat that grows near us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and it causes fear, and it is not necessary to do anything except to make fumigations in that which is small, and to prove and examine the entire intestine: if you find it as big as the nut of a walnut, and it does not touch any vein, then cut it, just as one cuts the nuts, and take it out completely, if there is any; and search well everywhere, and treat it as it is necessary, until it is perfectly healthy.
Many kinds of us are, of which I will describe all the similarities;
and then it is necessary that I speak of all the difference that is between us and them.
I say that hemorrhoids are hot and feverish tensions, until the bubbling has passed, and is accompanied by decay. then relieve the fever and the heat.
With our sort there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a husk, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and increases like a tumor, and becomes large;
and they are according to two similarities, either grey, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of an injury, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nails is that you take the most moist place that you find on the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, as much as you know that the instrument has pierced the heart, then that it be according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the entromissoire, and take heed in what sort it comes out.
If the moisture runs short, which color it has, thus make an incision as I have said regarding other abscesses;
and if after the entromissoire no moisture comes, know that it is fatty, thus make an incision in a cross, and take it with pincers, and scratch it lightly from each part and observe the coat where it lies that you pull it out whole with the injury;
and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it comes back to us many times;
and if a little remains, and the blood does not gush out, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and bind the wound, and put on soothing things for hot abscesses, and treat with other treatments until it is healthy;
and if the wound is large, then sew the two lips of the wound, and treat it with those things that promote scarring.
and if the veins are beating against it or otherwise, then hasten and apply to the limb a mixture of vitriol, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of the blood; then return to the copper those things that had been left from the outset.
Look here at the forms of the introverted entrails, and they are of three manners: large and medium and small;
and there are three parts which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like the needles which one uses to cut the sores, and they are of copper citrin, or iron, or silver, and some are yellow, and are more expensive than black plum for encircling the fistula's clogs;
and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The forms of the tumors are of many similarities, as you see here:
and if there are wounds that have two or three humors of the same kind;
and if there are wounds that have three humors, and are of three kinds;
and if there are wounds that have two humors, and wounds of only one humor, and are of three kinds;
and all these are necessary for their body.
The head of these [instruments] that one makes are cutting, and of such there are some that do not cut more than on one side, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
and of these [instruments] there are some that are applied to the limbs, so that the patient does not feel themselves at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: Great, small, and moderate, as you see;
and do not use more force than on the joints of the legs, such as knees, and arms, and shoulders, and limbs, and similar ones;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to the shape of a fistula, according to this form, to staunch blood: and one puts it sometimes at the place that bleeds abundantly from the veins, and arteries, and sometimes breaks according to this great form:
Sometimes they swell the shoulders of certain men when they become corrupted, until they seem to be female shoulders;
and they remain swollen and inflated, and whoever wants to cure them, if it is necessary to treat according to the form of this line up to the seventh hour: Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with healing medicine of charcoal, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and the treatment until it is healed;
and if the breast hangs low, and is dislocated by its size as it happens to women, then make two sutures above, through similar incisions; so that one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line  to the line; then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the lack of blood, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive oil; and let it be until it reaches the mucus and the fat, then treat it until it is healthy.
These abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are kinds of hard scrapings where there is crust, and in which there is moisture.
Those therefore that contain moisture need to be cut according to this form, from line B to line G: And when the whole boil that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with dressing sufficiently until it is healthy.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrapings, then do it as we have said in cases of scrapings, and if the wound is open, then apply cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then often come abscesses, and also it happens to the swollen and abscessed vein;
and if one knows in this case what is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, feel for the strangeness;
and when it is due to the vein, then it is because of defective blood flow;
and it is foolish to try to treat this abscess, and similarly when it is under the shoulders and arms and neck and in many other places, and it is very serious. It is necessary then to avoid the treatment of iron, and the one who is in charge must avoid it also, and for the one who has a swollen artery, they make an incision through the skin from far away;
Then open the waist to the ankles, and carefully separate the artery from the tendons, until it is exposed;
Then push through the flesh a needle, and make it pierce just to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread on both sides, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then touch the limb which is between the two strings of an instrument as far as the blood can flow from it, and let the abscess be opened;
Then bring together the wound that the bowels are pushing out, until the string is tied; Then heal what joins to what, until it is healthy;
and if the abscesses are along the length of the vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can from the abscess to all the skin, then push the needle through the flesh that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; After the abscess, as I have told you, or the ligament of one of the two parts at the two sides of the flesh;
and if you doubt that the thread will not come out, then you rethread another needle through all the threads beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
then cut the abscess as long as the superfluity goes, then cut the superfluity from the flesh and let remain what is tied;
then put on a dressing moistened with wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and bandages until it is healed.
Also, just as abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the kidneys when they are injured, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
And this often happens in the joints and in the fingers and in all the limbs where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many conditions without pain;
and when it is extracted forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in depth of the body, but rather near the heart;
and it moves well in all directions, and does not go neither forward nor backward, neither up nor down, and that which is in the joints does not need to be cut with iron; by chance it becomes a contraction; and those who are at the head or at the forehead, make the skin spatulate.
and those who are at the head or at the forehead, make the skin spatulate. If the abscess is small, then hold it with a bandage, and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, then suck on the wound, and scratch it, then remove the bone and reassemble the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healthy.
Sometimes it occurs in the belly and not in any other part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has a subtle root, and the head is large;
and it has small feet and very large mouths;
and I saw a man who had two of them in his belly which looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had thin roots, and they were already cut, and they corrupted the moisture.
I cut them out and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six, and the work of cutting is that you should examine if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the tumor is white and moist with a subtle root; If the cupping is on the broad spatula, then it should be in your presence with the fire cautery.
If the cupping is on the broad spatula, then it should be in your presence with the fire cautery. For in the cutting there often comes too much blood, and if it is not stopped, then you must have the cautery nearby;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made thread of flax, and tie the joint as we have said, and let it be two days;
and then restrain it, and do not stop tightening the thread of flax until it holds the joint, and cut it without effort;
and if the roots are large, fear to cut them in the middle for the belly, but you can well cut half of it, then apply the cautery so it does not grow back;
then treat the wound, and beware that you do not cut the tendon which is of fixed color and little sensation and of slow movement.
For this is an enclosed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer after this.
When the navel is blocked If the appearance of the navel comes from cauterization of a wound or a cut on the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the navels, as it happens in other instances, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is present, or from flatulence;
and if it is through the cut of the skin and the discharge from the navel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various discharge. And if it is through the discharge of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses on their sides if they are swollen, and then it returns, and by chance if it is strained, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and from strong labor.
And if it's due to moisture, it's a light thing, and it appears well when you press it with your hand, not constraining anything.
And if it's due to blood, it appears by these signs: the abscesses being large and hard, and stuck according to a quantity; And if it's due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you examine its appearance for blood of the artery, or of the vein, or flatulence.
And if it's due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you examine its appearance for blood of the artery, or of the vein, or flatulence. It is fitting that you abandon the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to pull in his belly, and be stretched out straight, then sign with ink all around the navel. Then instruct him to sit down between your hands, then go inside the bed that you have designated for all the spatula, then place the majority of the abscess upwards towards all the great uncle. Then tie him with a strong thread, or with a cord of strong twisted rope firmly, and let us have the soothing bandage.
Then open the majority of the abscess stretched on the bandage, and you will find your right index finger, and cut the intestine; If you have tied it with the bandage, untie it, and cut the intestine at the bottom of the belly;
and if you have found the bowel, take it with the groin, and cut away the excess flesh;
and if the artery or vein has made you hesitant, then go gently inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and you will thread two strong threads, and put the two needles inside that which you have made in a cross that you make puncture;
Then strain the abscess in four locations under the ankles, and if you see it, remove the ankles, and let the body alone until it purifies, and cut the dead flesh by itself. or remove it when it becomes subtle and purified, then treat what needs treatment, and cut the abscess as we have said;
or remove it when it becomes subtle and purified, then treat what needs treatment, and cut the abscess as we have said; and strain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the body for what it needs, and sew the body.
of cancer We have spoken in the section about the symptoms of cancer, and how one should open with medicines, and how one should choose the treatment of iron.
and let us say that cancer grows in the marrow, and requires great caution in treatment, and the ancients said that when there are cancers in the body or where one can remove them like a cancer that is in the breast, and in the thigh, and in similar places, and one should entirely remove it when it is at the beginning.
no one has ever been harmed in my presence.
And the work, when it is in the body or where one can hide it, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile;
then make him spit if he has shown a fullness, then prepare the patient with good body to perform the work;
then cut your lancets or hooks, and shave all around, and remove the bone from all parts without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the body with your hand or with something, and if the flowing of blood makes you feel contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stanched; Then let the treatment of another treatment last until he is healthy.
Of dropsy. We have already said in the division the symptoms of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each symptom, and the treatment which is made by medicines, and that which is treated with iron.
and one should not touch with iron in these two symptoms: it is to know, tympanites and hypochondria, for it is mortal things;
then when you apply medicine to this symptom of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicine, and the treatment does not benefit, if consider that the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as a tumor and diarrhea and similar things; If he does not touch iron, for there is doubt in it;
and if you see the patient with a strong and virtuous constitution, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should operate: Lift the patient straight up in your hands, and let the attendants press the belly with the needle at the lowest part of the breast, then take the spinal instrument according to this form: And be cutting on both sides. to the point, and let it not be so internal that it can come near to the intestine when one puts in the fig, and does not obstruct it;
then examine if the dropsy is turning towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you open into the belly three fingers deep above the navel; and if the dropsy is caused by the illness of the liver, it should be a flesion on the left side of the abdomen for III fingers;
and if it's due to the spleen, then it should be on the right, and it is necessary that the patient urinate on the flesion so the superfluities do not flow to that weak place;
then pierce the skin with the instrument, and the knot, and raise the hand on all the spatula between the skin and the surface, just as in scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or toenail;
then pierce the surface until the spatula comes to the empty place, and it is the place of the needle, then pull it strongly, and I thrust this instrument from which this form is; And it is similar to a thread of subtle silver, and is made of thin copper or brass, and has on the end a small perforation; and where it costs from one side, three piercings; and two of another side, and one of another;
and the head is cut like a quill, and it is the form of the incision that the writers carve the quill:
at the top of them is the knob, so that when the tendons come to the knob, they now slide on the tendon;
empty then the half or the third part, for if you empty more than it is necessary at that hour, by chance the patient dies from the resolution of his arm's spirit, or he falls into a coma, or he approaches death;
but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to that which the dispositions of the virtue of the sick man signify, and his pulses;
Then bring the instrument and hold the needle, and it is held now by the heart which stops up the perforation which is on the surface, from what I have spoken, that you should proceed according to this manner;
Then reinsert the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and bring with the needle a small quantity;
Do it on that day, and guard yourself from putting too much except for a little needle.
And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much of the needle, so the treatment of the tomb or swollen abscess is hot, and with much sweat or bath and in the sun, and dye with vitriol; and the treatment with drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the needle, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born who do not have a hole in the rod, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
If it happens that he has to pierce all the very subtle tissue according to this form:
Then put or make a subtle hole in the pipe of the bladder, and tie it and hold it thus for three or four hours, and when he wants to urinate, let the hole be opened, and let him urinate, and then close it again;
and by chance there is no harm, for the urine that comes out does not allow it to be closed.
For one whose hole is small, there is a medicine for the pipe of the bladder, as we have said, which will enlarge it.
Those who do not have the hole in its place are crippled, for none are born with the hole at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before they lift their rod up high; and they cannot heal because the matter cannot come close to the marrow, and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of the treatment is that the patients lie on their back, put the head of the rod and the handle as the width of a quill, so that the perforation happens in the middle, as it is necessary;
and beware of the effusion of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then stop the flow of what flows blood, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
of the pimples on the rod Many times cysts come to the rod, and it is an appearance of flesh wound;
and in them there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
if necessary, you should take them with a subtle onion, and cut and cleanse all, then put on moist cotton in Egyptian ointment; then cure the joint until it becomes healthy.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you should apply a cauterization.
When you have cut it, and the ulcer is on the edge, and has one part inside the skin and one part outside, then you should remove the ulcer that is inside first. and when it is sewn, then cure the outside.
For when you cure it together, it is not assured that the edge of the wound will not be pierced, and comes blackness and corruption in its edge and in the body.
then you should remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the bark of pomegranate trees and lichen, then cure it with other cures until it becomes healthy.
And if an issue of blood comes, then prepare the lunar cautery according to this method:
The cauteries help with two dispositional conditions together: it is to know, for the issue of blood, and for the corruption;
and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you put or conduct on the rod a chain of lead, and let the patient urinate through;
and when the skin is adherent to the head of the rod in those who have not been circumcised, or it is because of a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scratch with a sharpened instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the rod is freed from all parts;
and if it is a grievous thing to divide the flesh, then it is necessary that you scratch with a spatula or some pointed tool at the head of the rod and of the skin;
Then sever gently between II, and put a subtle layer of warm linen on the cold limb, so that it does not stiffen.
Circumcision is not a matter of continued dressings like other wounds; In every way that we do this work of our will, and especially for children, it is necessary that we do the least harmful work, and the lightest for their health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing but what we have acquired through experimentation.
For I have seen the greatest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions on men in their old age, and with force, and all to no avail;
if the heart is affected because it has two tissues, and by chance if one takes a blow and the other remains unaffected. When the hip joint is injured, and the pain is double, and in the treatment which is painful it is not assured that the point of the member will be restored;
and in the treatment of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrupts the work, and many times it happens that they have no need for treatment and I have seen it.
Of the treatment which is made to the thread of string I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well both sides and excesses.
For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in the whole stretch; but that the thread should be well stretched around the leather;
and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him tie the thread around the stick so tightly, and then you make it come out in all the ways that you can;
Then make it straight between your hands, and support the strengths between your hands or under your feet so that the veins are not seen, nor any of the tendons.
Then put your hand to the rod and blow on the wound, and pull it up high as long as the head of the rod is inside; Then cleanse it well of the filth that has accumulated, then tie the limb securely with a double thread, then tie it under the hip to the other limb;
Then cleanse it well of the filth that has accumulated, then tie the limb securely with a double thread, then tie it under the hip to the other limb; and tie it to the two fingers by the second ligature at the pouchet and the index finger, and cut between the two threads, then lift the heart upwards gently and pull the head of the rod; Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy; and apply powder on it and on the powder a plaster made from a mixture of cooked tempered vinegar of rose, jammed with rose oil, good and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat with another treatment as long as it is sick.
The form of the forces at the mundification is this:
the two sides should be held and should be cutting, and the sides should be as large as the same width:
the failure of the mundification is when the inner core is not suitable for the incision;
then it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the limbs make an abscess;
and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with clamps, and then cut it.
And if it lasts three days, and that which is beneath the rod is swollen, then let it be until the abscessed place is appeased, and the scab is lightly;
if you cut it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm him.
Heal then the wound of things burned by powder, which we have said or treated in the chapter on powders, and if one cuts too deeply and it goes to excess, and it rises, so it will not harm.
Heal the wound, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Retention of urine.
The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of bowel, or of dead flesh, or of similar things, which we have spoken of in the division.
and if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in the neck or collar of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and his belly be stretched from the upper part to the back, and let the patient restrain his thigh as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the pressure on the stone above, because of which the urine is stopped;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer the extraction using all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
and let it be made of subtle silver, lightweight and hollow, like a bird's feather; and let its tube be a palm and a half in length, and let it be subtle at the end.
And the method of urination is that you take a double thread, and tie at its end a small ball of wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread inside the syringe;
and cut off the excess of the wool and push it just to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist oil of olive and oil of olives and heated water;
Then lightly put the syringe on the rod, until it comes to the root of the rod, then fold the rod back towards the bulb;
Then push the syringe forward just to the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming just to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because what leads there where it goes is twisted;
Then pull the thread throughout the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it outside, and make the urine flow;
and reintroduce the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
When concretions or blood come into the bladder, or pus is gathered, and you want to administer sharp medicines, then make all the instrument that is called "clyster", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if there are three openings: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the limbs are held by what the medical treatment is such that it supports well the rod without addition, if one can then draw in the moisture, and push where the need is;
and when you see to give your medications in the bladder, put the head of the syringe into the moisture, and draw out the drawing that is inside;
if you draw out the moisture with the syringe, and then strongly push back the drawer inside; if the moistures enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle pipe through which one administers a clyster to the bladder:
And it is of silver or of steel, and the head is higher;
and disjointed from the breast or where the ligaments hold;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you want to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a bond with a double thread, and heat this moisture on the fire;
then thrust the head of the cleanser into the rod, then stretch your hand on the bladder to bring all the moisture together, until the patient feels that the moisture has gone into the bladder;
and if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a bowl, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stones, and the extraction together with medicines;
and have said the difference between the stone in the kidney and in the bladder, and all the symptoms, and in which stone one should operate with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the rod;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder often happens to children, and it's a sign that the water of the bladder escapes similarly to water in its subtlety;
and it openly harasses, and rubs the patient's rod, and constrains them many times, and then congeals; and from many of these jumps the foundations
and the healing of children is light until they are 4 years old, and is very grievous in the elderly, and is similar to the middle-aged, for those who are between youth and old age;
and the treatment is easier for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a cluster, to purge all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders one from seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and bend and move to the back, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes jumps out from the high place;
then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be behind his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declined downwards;
Then touch the wound and inside;
If you feel the stone in the bladder, hasten now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall from touching everything, anoint your right index finger with oil of the left hand, if the patient is old, or your right middle finger, if the patient is young and complete; and put it in its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if it is near the neck of the bladder;
then press on with your finger, and put it to the back of the place where you see to cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him that he stretches with his right hand the intestines upwards, and with his left hand holds the skin which is beneath the intestines in the area where the cut is made;
then he wraps the spitum with a copant, from which this is the form: And make between that which is between the intestines and the fundament, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
and let it be straight on the stone, and its two sides be equal or fundamental, and let the width be traversed so that it is wide by defect, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
by chance the press if its two sides which are in the fundament, so that it jumps without sensible labor;
and know that there is a part of stone where it has edges and margins: thus it is ready to be extracted;
and if the part that is underneath, resembles a pebble, and is rounded, whose exit is slight.
At the sky hence where it has edges and margin, make the cut larger;
and if it does not heal, then you must strain on the tendons that are as a file to the head, for moving the stone so that it does not crack; or you apply an instrument subtly curved at the head;
and if you cannot engineer it in, then enlarge the little hole a little, and if the blood does not flow out, then strain with a glass tube;
and if there is more than one stone, then put the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut into it, then pull out strongly, and the small ones afterwards if there are several;
And if it is very large, then it must be extracted, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: Where it dies, or the urine comes repeatedly by the bed that the bladder cannot hold.
but you must force yourself to drag or to pull out the tendons, until you pull it apart by pieces;
and when you have completed your work, apply to the wound of tar and of rose water and of dragon's blood, and strain it, and put on a moistened cloth in oil and in wine, or in oil and in warm rose water and cold, to appease the hot abscess; then support the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you untie it, anoint the limb well with oil and water, then treat it with application of diyachilon and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
And if an abscess or a wound comes with corrosion, and there is a coagulation of blood in the bladder, and the urine is retained by this means, which is done in such a way that without health with the urine: Then put your finger into the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and rot it;
Then lift the wound from the pus and the blood and the serum, and help it in all the ways that you know, until it is healed;
and it is necessary that all the uses that you treat, that you tie the thighs together, and apply the medicine to the wound.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and fixed in, and the urine cannot come out; If the treatment of what I describe thus, that you often cut with a knife, is excused from cutting for this treatment. I have already proven it thus.
Take the iron rod in this shape and let it be with three angled points in one piece:
then take the thread and tie it around the end of the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
then push the iron rod gently into the orifice until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron rod with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
if urine comes out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the orifice. If it is thus broken, and the blood comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this because of something that prevents it, then tie the thread beneath the stone and the other above, then put the orifice in place against the stone between the two threads, then pull out the thread, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and heal them as long as they are sick.
of the stone of women
It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, and if it does happen, then the treatment is grievous, and is forbidden for three things:
one is that by chance the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-versed and knows how to cure herself with remedies, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in this art with her hands;
and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is deeper than the stone of the man, for which it requires a deeper and more dangerous cut, and there is great fear in it. And if there is need for it, then it is necessary that you take a well-versed midwife, and with pincers seize the thing, and if you do not seize it, then ask for a chaste and subtle midwife;
and it presents a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instructs her to do what you instruct regarding the inquiry of the stone; and consider very well if the woman is a virgin:
and consider very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her hand or foundation and search for the stone;
and if she finds it, if the pain moves away from her hand, and instructs her to put her hand or with the patient, and feels and presses her left hand on the stomach firmly.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it from the groin to the bottom of the stomach up to down, until it comes to the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the spine, where it appears to be moved, and feel the stone in that area; and does not move his finger from the stone or above, and let his thumb be cut to the first joint;
and does not move his finger from the stone or above, and let his thumb be cut to the first joint; then cut in the wound, if you feel the stone with your finger, increase the size of the wound until the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones:
it is known, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have edges.
if you know the similarities to determine the outcome.
And if the blood does not stop, then apply a dressing of vitriol to the wound, and hold it for an hour until the blood is stanched;
then return to your work, until the stone is out, and use the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone for men to help you in your work;
and if the blood is coming out, and it’s from an artery that has been cut, then put powder on the wound and bind with bandages and strips, and do not press again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient might die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has been calmed, and the limbs have been purified, then return to your work, until the stone is removed.
Rumor aqueous is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or whitish fluid, which is dislocated from the area of the intestines, that contains the humor;
and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the liver, so that one thinks that it is another liver; and it is the skin of the knee between the white and the thigh that we have mentioned;
and this does not happen rarely. And the generation of this branch is from weakness that comes to the knees, and the matter is spread there.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the knees, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a yellowish color, or without red, or black, or pale white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is on the white and thigh that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are round, a little long like the figure of an egg, and do not touch the knees, for there is moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own area, then the abscesses are round with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the legs and the white surface, then it feels good;
then when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine thoroughly all the interior quarters, from which the shape is formed before. According to that which comes after the interior, judge what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
then put a bandage on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths under him;
then sit on his left side, and instruct the servant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart of the legs;
then take the left spatula, and cut the skin of the legs in length until near the knee, and let the incision be quite straight, dividing the skin of the legs up to the white surface, and scrape subtly according to his power;
Then pierce the outer layer of the skin with a needle, and extract all the pus, and then apply your poultices, and the outer layer is mended;
and do not touch the core of the abscesses, but only the surface; cut all or in pieces the covering of it subtly, that if you do not cut it well wisely, the pus will return;
and if the skin is sound and strong on your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the outer layer;
then assemble the two lips of the core of the abscesses to a suture, then treat it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the skin corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to ligate the veins that are suspended, doubting the deterioration of blood;
Then cut around the head to all the suspensor, and extract the vein, and treat it as we have said.
And if the bone is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put on the wound a moist linen cloth in oil of rose;
if cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put on the wound a moist linen cloth in oil of rose; and put on another moist linen cloth in wine and oil, and put on the two heads, and put above doubled dressings, and tie it with all the string that is according to this form:
Then take two dressings, and fill them with linen dressing according to this likeness and let them be assembled by sewing on the throat of the arm, and one of the sides takes hold on the bottom up to the back, and the other to the part of the elbow;
and the other due to the head on the two shoulders, and let the entire assembly of the restraint be in the curve of the arm.
and sometimes this treatment of cauterization is applied to the iron in the size of the thigh, and it is that you take a fine cautery tool, and cut the skin of the intestines, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white stuff that contains the pus is uncovered;
if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that stuff as with needles, and scrape it with this fine hot cautery tool:
And cut it in all the ways that you can, until you scratch everything;
and beware that the hot thing does not touch the eye;
and know that this work is more salvatory; and beware of the shedding of blood, and doctors of the treatment of the thigh;
and if none of these things oppose you, or an abscess or a flow of blood or another thing, then treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horror, then perform a perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned that the humors are in balance, then make the patient sit on the seat, elevated. Then pierce the abscess on the lower part of the spatula, and make the perforation as long as the body allows.
and let the wound be wide, so that all the pus can flow out.
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining pus flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed.
and if the white tissue does not let the pus exit from the mouth of the wound, then you must put a probe or the instrument with which one treats the pus of dropsy, whose shape is thus before;
and enlarge a little the wound, and know that the pus returns, and is assembled after six months or within a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
Know that in the cutting of this vein there is fear in many conditions, because it seems to me that moving it is worth leaving it alone;
and I will tell you the work and the symptoms of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and especially to the entrails; and it is in many cases.
It is to be known by excess of bitter and sharp humor, which is spread to the bowels, or from a blow;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and it does not find a point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance there are some grievous and fearful abscesses, and of a foul color, and sometimes come from an artery, or from the swelling of a vein.
When it is from an artery, it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers; and it does not matter that you touch it.
That which is made from the swelling of a vein is known by its disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers, and one can well make an incision on this likeness, and on the other painful places; and it is that you cut around the area of the abscesses, then are the veins elevated, and pull the skin of the white surface, and deliver the swelling from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already swollen with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you pull the vein, and cut around it;
and if it is near the surface, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver the entire tendon, and cut around it equally.
And if the birth of the wound is in the rear vein, then it is necessary that you cut it entirely, and extract the vein, as we have said.
And when the work is completed, apply the wound with a dressing of warm oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a swelling, with the softening of the entrails, and the patient feels grievous pain when he walks;
and the treatment of this illness is as well prescribed anxiously as the one previously mentioned, and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a seat or a bench, then apply to him the suspension of the entrails below your fingers, to all the vessels which are near to the anus, and bind the thighs, and stretch them forcibly;
then cut with the spatula knife widely through to reveal the vessels, as long as they are discovered, and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
Then he fixes a needle where there is a double thread, and ties it to the first joint where the vein has come, and ties it again at the other end; Then he cuts them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and removes the corrupted tissues;
Then he cures the wound like the others or where a bone is exposed, so that no vessel is seen that nourishes one of the intestines;
for from this comes no harm, and if all the vessels are near, then it is necessary to cut through the intestines to all the vessels; so that the bones do not lose their nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and dry and cannot be helped;
The coming of this flux is by the section that comes from the spleen, or the tension on the belly in the area of the shoulders, because the intestine descends from that rupture to one of the intestines;
and this dislocation is from the double joint, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes:
from a blow, or a jump, or a fall, or from lifting of a heavy burden, and similar things;
and the symptoms when it is from the extension of the joint, are that they come on gradually and slowly, over a long period, and do not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the depth, because the joint presses on the intestine.
And the symptoms are when it is from the dislocation of the joint, that it brings on sudden severe pain, and there are various abscesses appearing beneath the skin, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body at the fault of the joint.
And sometimes the intestines slip with the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these treatments of iron with fear, because it makes them want to escape.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to put their intestines back in with their hand inside the wound, if it can be re-entered; then let them be supported on their neck, between your hands, and lift the hips;
then stretch the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the intestines from along the length; then put inside the liver of the waist, pieces according to that which you have need to open the wound, and let it be such that the bones can protrude;
then scrape the surface that is beneath the skin of the intestines, until the white surface appears uncovered on all parts;
then put your index finger in that which guides the intestine, in that which is between the white surface that is beneath the skin of the navel, and between the second surface, and separate that which is behind the navel, and between the second surface;
and then move to the right hand inside the heart of the intestines, and let the white skin be above on your left hand, and lift the vein to all the skin towards the waist; and instruct the minister that he stretches the vein upwards, and unties what is behind the ligament;
and ask your fingers if there is a point on the intestine enveloped or white skin hard, and if you find anything, then push it to the bottom of the belly;
then take a needle where there is a thick thread made of many threads, and push it into the back part of the skin, which is after the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then cut the hands that appear with threads, as long as there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the skin, which we have said is behind the skin of the intestines, with a strong ligament of two parts; Then wrap the heads of the veins, and bind them in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter, lest the abscess that is there not grow. and put the third vein according to the first long two fingers from that one, and after these two veins leave enough space which is hidden near the heart of the intestines the size of a finger; and afterwards all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries;
then cut in the part which is next to the skin of the intestines, as far as the blood and the bowel, as we have said before;
then anoint the moistened wool with oil, and put it on the wounds, and I will anoint the vein that we have spoken of. And sometimes the said bladder is cauterized after the incision, due to doubt of excessive blood flow. For this happens often, and leaves the string alone until it cuts through by itself;
and if it is late in healing, then apply a warm poultice, and put on that which we have said, until it cuts;
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshy hernia
In this disease I have never seen anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
And the ancient ones said that it is made like the disease which is next to the liver, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision above and below lightly with a thread;
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of that which is swollen, until the vessels dry;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Sometimes the joint comes out of its socket, as we have said, and separates the limb;
and it doesn't touch any of the intestines to the cotyledons, and if it touches them, it's a little, and repairs all hours;
and nevertheless if it stays too long in this spot, the wound or fistula grows, until the intestine touches;
and this happens through the extension of the fistula that is at the joint, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and the limb becomes flabby and separates;
and its treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously said;
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient puts his hand over his back between their hands, then cuts the limb of the dislocated joint with a large scalpel according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the abscess that is beneath the skin where it swells, then take the razor and put it on the apparent place of the abscess;
and press on the deep part of the belly, then cut the two apparent places of the abscess on the edge of the razor, and cut one and the other;
then extract the edge of the razor, and do not touch any part of the abscess nor extend the opening to anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of the ulceration of the intestines; then cure it with the treatment for wounds.
then cure it with the treatment for wounds. And when you cut the threads, if it becomes inflamed and cure the wound, until it is healthy.
The abscess is constricted, and has no appearance on the outside, and the cauterizations are applied to this place, and closer to health.
of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Many times is softened the skin of the intestines in some men, because the inner layers that are inside are made soft, and it is disgusting to see;
and it is a job, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on their back, and to cut the skin that has become soft on the natural skin;
then bring the two lips together with a suture, and you see, first cut away the excess of the softened skin to three or four firm sutures;
then cut between the sutures, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of the castigation
Purging is abhorred in our law, and for this reason it pleases me that I do not speak of it in this book;
and it is not necessary to force it for two manners:
one of which is that the physician hastens to respond when one asks him, and in haste the treatment;
and the other, because we often have need of the flesh of certain beasts to help us, such as of goat and of sheep and of cat and other beasts.
I say therefore that cauterization is done in two ways: either by traction, or by incision.
In the one that we do by traction, we make the beast sit in warm water, until the member is softened and hanging; then we take it with our hand, as long as it is loose and you do not feel them anymore.
Of the cauterization of the thigh: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then lift the penis, and cut above each testicle, when you have them well exposed;
and let none of the thick skin and the subtle skin which is on the vessels;
and this manner of punishment is worse than that which is made by traction, because in traction there remains by chance some thing of the entrails, by which the beast desires filth;
then heal the wound until it is healthy.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to two manners in men: one is that between the two entrails open as well as the figure of the nature of a woman, where it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine.
And the other manner is in women, and has on the fist as a rod and two entrails.
And the treatment of the man and the woman is that you cut the adjacent flesh all, and heal it as other wounds;
In the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the intestines, there is no point of cure.
Tenderness is an ulcer located on the natural part, as it is too shameful to see; and some women have had it so large as a hand, and this is the cure.
It is necessary that you take the superfluity of the tenderness with your hand or with tongs, and grasp it lightly;
and do not pull too much from the bottom, lest a flow of blood does not come, for one cure drives out another cure until it is healthy;
and for another ulcer that grows at the mouth of the marrows, and fills it, and by chance breaks out, and is similar in appearance to a cow's, and for this they call it the ancient "cow disease". If it is necessary to amputate, as we have said the incision, and the treatment until it is healed.
Rheumatic is that which when the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the passage is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to her;
and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to her; or it is from sharp adjustment, or of subtle and thin sieve, and is made deep in the marrow, or in the ribs, or in the back, or wherever it may be;
and prevents conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers have to wither;
and the knowledge of this thing is through the examination of the belly.
If the swelling appears near the thigh, or to your back or to the hip.
If it is a subtle and thin humor, and it approaches the lungs, then hurry, and anoint the joints:
Put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs;
Then feel the two lungs strongly, until the subtle humor is gone, and let the stoppages be covered;
Then take the vein, and the mole in oil, and put it on the body, and give the woman a house remedy each hour, so that she cannot suffocate.
And if the humor is hard and thick, then it is necessary to cut the similar spongy tissue resembling a molar tooth.
If the stoppages are of flesh origin, then let it be supported on the shoulder and cut;
and apply the blood-stanching medications, such as acacia, dragon's blood, frankincense, mixed with a little oil;
Then anoint a plaster of wide lung, so that the wound cannot suppurate;
and let it be for a long time, and anoint it with a plaster of dry flax;
then let it be cured with other cures until it is healed.
And when in the marrow comes a sharp humor, if you treat it according to this method, unless it is an abscess that has become enclosed. For the enclosed abscess that is in the marrow, one should not touch it with iron.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which without warning flow, and when the hemorrhoids are old they become hard.
and we have already said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive a cure.
I say that the hemorrhoids and the thigh, when they are deeply in the marrow, and do not appear to feeling, if it is not the cure by iron.
Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, one can feel, are those that one can cure.
It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, afterwards apply the poultice as a bandage, and cut at its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
then soak her feet in a warm bath for an hour, then put her in cold water;
and if a flow of blood comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumach and bark of pomegranate trees and gall and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster to put on her back.
And if it is strained, it's good. If not, then have made warm applications on the back and to the same sides to strike;
Then take a woolen cloth, and the extract in juice of plantain or in juice of aglentier with old wine, and apply warm to the limb.
And when the abscess has burst, then treat the limb with ointment as long as it is sore;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles the rough head, if it is necessary to scrape as I have said the tumour; and then treat it until it is healthy.
Many kinds of abscesses come in the marrow, such as cancer and abscesses that burst and herpes and eczemas and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division.
It is necessary then to describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that affect the bowel.
and if you want to know the work of iron, look at the abscesses when they begin to arrive, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but make it measure until the pain is appeased;
and then make the patient sit on a seat, and let him have two small seats where he can lean, and support himself on his back and bring his feet together with the parts separated from the leg;
and let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a binding bond;
then suck the abscess towards the right side, and introduce the instrument through which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the discharge;
and it is necessary that when you go to administer this instrument, that you first determine the depth of the marrow, so that what enters into the instrument does not come more deeply than it should, and that it does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with cloths, so that the instruments do not injure them;
and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument to the bottom, and that he holds the instrument.
And when the abscesses are open, and one makes a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover the head with a spatula or a sponge.
and when the wound is empty, then it is necessary that you put in the wound moist bandages in rose oil, or in dry green oil;
and put the tent or suture of the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put through the marrow and on the finger a clean linen bandage in water or vinegar so that it is cooked;
then treat afterwards for 2 hours of applying heat, having it on until it is healed;
and sometimes raise the marrow and the wound with a syringe of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and aristolochia being cooked; then return to the heat treatment.
And if the wound grows in the marrow, it is necessary that you protect yourself from iron cauterization, but rather treat it as we have said in the section.
of swelling It is proper first to know the shape of the natural swelling of the womb, and these signs are when you see the woman press down below, and desire to smell the air:
Then the sinews of force hasten to issue forth; But it is known that these infantements are according to the natural figure, and they issue from their head, and the second with them;
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the sinews issue all at once;
for when it descends to its head, the secondine goes with it, and the marrow is cleaned of its superfluities by good purification;
and that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes sometimes to its feet, and comes to the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes to his belly, or to the liver, and is converted by accident over his neck, and by other evil figures;
it is necessary for the healer to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them.
If the infant comes out naturally onto its head, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the womb is weak, then make her sit on a seat, or the women hold her;
and let its natural oil or heated poultice be applied, and then put the bath between her two thighs the small suppository of which this is the form: and cut the secondine, and apply to one nail as much as the moisture that is in its shank bone;
and press the woman's stomach until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with a massage of heated poultice with oil of cypress;
then make her press and strain with condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the infant will come out.
And if both hands become dislocated, then it is necessary that you reset them lightly little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high; then remove the seat from the ground, and hold the woman, so she does not fall due to the removal;
and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then cut the hands at the joint which is situated in front, and extract the infant, and reset similarly;
of the extraction of the infant from its feet When the infant comes to its feet, then it is necessary to push from above; and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
then take one of the feet and extend it little by little.
When it jumps up to the hips, if it is ordered to grip, and the hand is made to press on the condyle; if it rises too much, then God wants it.
And if it doesn't go too far as we have said, if it turns little by little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is lighter.
And if it doesn't come as we have said, take a mixture of oil and wax, and melted gum, and pound all in the mortar; and apply this ointment to the nature of the woman inside and outside, then make her sit in hot water until the bottom of the hips;
and when she is moistened from below, make her a poultice of myrrh, and put it below, and let it stay for an hour; Then make her sit on a seat, then make her stretch and hold her mouth and nose, and press her stomach gently, for the infant jumps now.
from the issue of the child onto its knees When the infant comes in this form, thus I put its ball in its hands little by little; then let it be laid on its neck, and its feet hang down, and let it sleep on the bed; and fold its hands little by little, and then press its hands on the stomach, and remove the cushions from beneath, until it is prepared down below; and if the infant does not jump, then take its feet and move them gently, then move the stomach upwards, then I move its hands; and rock the infant little by little; and instruct the woman to grasp herself as much as the infant is coming out.
of the exit of the child who comes with one hand while It is necessary to put back the hand: if it cannot be put back, then make the woman get up and walk;
if she cannot walk, then have her sit on a bed, and take off her tight leggings;
then anoint the muscle that I have mentioned;
and if she is not delivering, then have her sit on a chair, then try to put back the hand; and turn the child according to its natural position, and have her exert herself, and instruct her to grasp herself as much as the infant is coming out.
of the exit of the child on its neck, and having expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back; It is necessary that the patient holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and lifts the arm lightly;
and when it is even, put on the natural muscle of the shoulder and the elbow, as we have said, then instruct that it moves little by little;
and when you have done this, make him sit on a seat, and instruct him to take himself in hand; and make him stretch. in the same manner for the whole second finger
in the same manner for the whole second finger When it comes to this manner for the whole second finger, cut the second finger to one nail, until the mucus is evacuated;
and if it swells on his face and on his neck, cut it from the throat, so it is not retained, and the swelling decreases;
then take the child inside, as long as you have put it as it is necessary, and instruct the woman to take herself in hand at any time:
of the discharge of the twins It is known that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they have a rare name;
Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they have a rare name; I know that it is because they are multiplied, and are divided by the blood vessel which separates them, which is tied to the navel;
and sometimes they come out naturally like one body, as we have said.
And if they come out completely, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle bath, and do and handle lightly what it does; and do it as it is worth for health. Of many infants
Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and all are fully formed in the shape of an infant by the measurement of the wise glorious sage, and it is necessary that the wise woman knows all this, for by chance similar things happen; thus do according to what is necessary
of the dead child
When you treat the woman of the dead or stillborn child, as I have said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to perform a manual operation; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs be bent downward, and her thighs be raised;
and let the midwife take charge of the two parts, where she should be tied to the bed so that she is not treated with the downward movement of the infant;
then rub the mouth of the newborn with a mixture of oil made from nuts and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint its hands with these oils and mixtures;
then gently press on the newborn's legs, then turn its body to where it bends its knees that are suitable for this, and take care that the infant is prepared so that it descends upon its head;
if it fixes its knees in its eyes or in its neck or in its mouth or on its palate or under the beard or in the jaw or near the ribs, and if the downward movements are upon its feet, then it fixes or pricks them with tender ribs;
and it is necessary that he takes the ankle in his right hand, and puts the curvature between the two fingers of the left hand, and bends all his hand lightly, and fixes the ankle in one of those places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the empty thing;
then fix one against the other ankle, or you who are in this profession, so that the extractions are even;
and then stretch them evenly by moving from one side to the other, for the muscles to exit, and let the ankles be held by the muscles, as this is their shape:
And if one part remains, then anoint the joint with some of his fingers of oil, and bend it in that part, and pull the other part;
and if there remains a point of it, then put this ankle or higher place, and do that until all the fluid comes out.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back due to the strain, then you must wrap it with a bandage, until it becomes whole; then put the cup on the joint of the sole or the heel, and thus you must do on the other hand, and on the two feet.
And if the head of the infant is large and it is stuck in the birth, or it has the head tangled with the shoulders, then you must push the spinal vertebrae between your two hands, and make the head and extract the shoulders; or you round it to the instrument that is called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus same make the veins have a large natural head;
and then draw the bones to the tendons, and if the head is thrown out and it is strained by the strength, then let it be split, until the moisture that is in the foot issues out;
and if it cannot exit, then cut it by pieces from the mouth that you can;
and if it is stuck in the belly or between the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce through so that the moisture flows.
And if the needle is on his feet, then the attraction is light, and the dressing at the mouth of the wound is light.
And if it is stuck in the belly or in the chest, then it is necessary that you extract it with a draped bandage on the hand; and make an incision in the belly or the chest, so that the moisture that is there can flow;
and if the other limb is swollen, and the head remains, then put the bail of his hand in the depth of the wound, and pull it just to the mouth of the wound; then he puts one or two fingers, and pulls strongly;
and if the mouth of the abscess is narrowed by the hot aposteme that has come to it, then it does not matter to make an effort, but rather to apply moist and greasy things; and let the plasters be applied, and put on a soft, moistening and soothing poultice.
And if the vein is on its ribcage, and you can put it in place, then apply what we have said for a living infant;
and let no one touch it, if the skin is torn apart in pieces, and nothing will be left of the secondary.
And when you have done this, then apply what we have said regarding hot abscesses that come in the marrow;
and if a discharge of blood comes, then it should be stopped with a constricting poultice, and other treatments should be applied.
And I saw a woman whose belly had an infant that had been dead, then she conceived another upon that one, and the other was dead. After long tension, a abscess came to her womb, and swelled so much that it burst, and began to suppurate greatly.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not suture the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one. I was very amazed, because the belly had no bones to point of having bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I searched the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was in a better state; and the woman urinated for a long time afterwards, and little by little issued from her body;
and I have not recorded this chapter before because of that, when a master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to provide aid.
Then comes the shape of the presser, to which one gives the books;
and it turns to the heads of the two strings. In every way, the horns should be more subtle on the constrictor, and made from ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the staff should be one finger in width, and the margin of the trees two fingers, and a palm and a half in length; and between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same staff, which are attached to one and the other, a half palm in length or a little more;
and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the hammer to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, to its similarity more subtle and lighter, is made from wood of ebony or boxwood, according to the similarity of the tanneries. and it has two joints, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the woman's belly with all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, the feet hanging and the legs spread, then put the two joints joined together in the belly, and hold the head of the instrument separated between her thighs; then open your hand with the instrument, as you have done with the tanneries equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the belly, until the ball makes what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted on top, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the eyes are prepared, it is much more swift the work, and higher for men their ability.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessities are not an excuse.
When the secondine is retained in the infant, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her expel the mucus, and hold her hands at the mouth and nose; and if she spits through that, it's good.
If not, then take the vessel, and make a poultice or clyster, and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the throat, such as calamine, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire;
Then put a cane or stick through the hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the abscess, and pull tight so that the vapors come out from inside the abscess;
Then do the treatment, as we have said. If the secondary bandage is too tight.
And if it remains after this treatment, and is not loose, instruct the woman to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in masticatory of nutmeg, and then anoint the nature, and remove the bandage; and when she has found it, if she takes it and extends it little by little straightly, so that the abscess does not burst from the extraction;
but first move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull it; if it comes and is loosened.
And if the mouth of the thigh is tightly closed, we have said the treatment of purification, and of smoking with herbs;
and if it is not from all that which we have said, beware that you do not falter in the treatment;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the thigh, that you bind it to the hip of the woman, then anoint her with a four-part ointment; if the poultice and plaster are applied, and come to a fever;
but nevertheless, when it suppurates if bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and harasses the patient. If then it is necessary to have fumigations suitable for this:
some of the ancients have experienced smoking with crotons and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument by which one treats women for retention of flowers and of the secondine is this:
And it is to be seen similar to a chain, and put the thin head in the nature, and the wide feet on the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the dyer as long as it is wasted, and begin another.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but instead the upper part is stopped up with a thin syrup: so it is necessary for the nurse to pierce that upper part with her finger, and not to pierce the spatula of the gut, and to warn the child that it does not touch;
then put on the mole a moistening of wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not heal, then put or pass a chain of the pelvis, and let the hands be still, and be careful when the infant wants to go into chambers.
And sometimes there comes sudden swelling from a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to treat that one suddenly: it should be treated, as we have said concerning the chain of the pelvis.
Fistulas that come from the anus are an annoyance, and worse than those that come from the fundament, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or several;
and when that annoyance is ancient, it works, and brings forth moisture white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are perforating;
and they are known by what comes out or excretion or flatulence when the patient has diarrhea, and by chance in jumping of the blood vessel.
And if there are fistulas that reach up to the bladder, and up to the middle of the rod; and they come through to the joint of the thigh, and to the top of the hip.
And thus one recognizes the fistula that penetrates to the bottom, and does not penetrate: and it is that you apply your right index finger to the bottom, and apply a subtle needle of copper or iron in the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, then you apply a thread of subtle flax, or a horse hair, until you feel the thread or the hair at your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come through with diarrhea or flatulence or blood, as we have said: let it be that she does not perceive anything; if you hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the passage of the urine, if it affects the urine, and cannot be cured by medicines.
If it is perceived next to the joint of the thigh, then the tender vein comes next to the limb; if there is no twisting and the invention of the pain inside, then it is that it comes from the bowel, and no medicine or poultice is of value;
and in these fistulas next to it there is no cure except for work and vanity of foolish surgeons who intervene.
In the one that is not next to it and is not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient puts between your hands on their back;
and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his stomach; then probe with a tent of scarification, or of pulse if there is torsion, until you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it within the foundation, then you should put your right index finger, if then you feel that the probe has penetrated;
and is discovered where you feel between your fingers the skin or the flesh, then know that it is pierced; if not operated on, then one cannot heal it.
One can indeed heal some of them well with a poultice, but this happens rarely;
and the aid that is made, if it is that one cauterizes subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before; and heat the poultice thoroughly in the fistula, until it comes from beneath the foundation; and do this two or three times, until you know that these fatty tissues are burned, which resemble a feather of a bird;
and then treat with moist tents in butter, until that fatty tissue is softened, then treat with a greasy ointment sticking and soldering.
If it is thus healed, it is good.
Unless this is done, nothing else can heal;
and if it is inserted between, and does not penetrate just to the knuckle which is at the foundation, and between your knuckle and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of skin, and you see the fistula in this which shows the covering of the tumor; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and apply a poultice beforehand to the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent; and the tendon will be delivered, and will fall;
then I define those empty and withered members which seem a single finger, and nothing remains of them.
And if the blood comes to you, and cuts between the skin and the vein, then cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For the fire cauterizations bring together two bone things: it is to know, the joining of these withered members, and the stopping of blood and the drying of the moisture;
then treat the moist tendons with butter or broken nuts, until the limbs are supple and free, and put them back in their place in the bow.
then treat the wound of the dislocated joints with a harsh dry medicine, and these are the dried medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not come back.
And if a fistula comes from deep within the foundation, and it is separated from the body, then anoint the finger with the foundation, and inquire about that.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the web or the siphach or veins, or it is pressed to pierce, if there are not other than the way of relief and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut from the bottom of the wound, or if you can place tents and cure as before.
and do not go too deeply, so that you do not cut the tendon which holds the foundation, and come with the evacuations according to the will of the patient; then cure it, as we have said;
then cure it, as we have said; by adventure it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound after it is cut from the bottom of the foundation, or by a tent or other sharp instrument; then anoint the wound with the plaster that is on the spot, as much as you can; then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part against the foundation:
then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part against the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is or touches the bottom of the foundation under the skin, if take a needle pierced at the head in this form: And I push the thread through II, and push the needle with all the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
If it passes in the margin of the bottom within, then pull out the thread from that which has passed through, thus that you push your finger on the bottom;
and pull the head of the thread, and assemble the two parts together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay one or two days;
and restrain it several times, until the threads join these parts that are between the two, and stick together;
then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not penetrate, make it penetrate in all ways that you can, if the abscess is not too deep. For it is not suitable to make a cut for the fistula if it is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spinous spatula that one makes for the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and not on the other side, because one should not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: or they are within the fundament, like a grain of resin, and some are small and others large, and they often bleed, and there is one or several, and they are below the fundament and at the head of the fundament;
but those that are outside have little moisture, and often a bit of yellowish or greenish discharge, or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment for those who have them within the fundament, is that you instruct the patient to strain himself by going to the chamber, until the fundament is emptied, and the fissure is apparent; if you hasten it, and hold it with forceps, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the ulcers cannot be held by their moisture, then they take to a dressing, or a swab, or a piece of chamol. and extract them with the fingers, then cut them, and dust above some warm powders that are suitable for cauterization; or you will cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot be made to issue, then clysterize the patient with a sharp and bitter clyster to wash out what is in the foundation, so that it can issue openly; when the patient is pressed, and if the thread is cut from the foundation, then the treatment is light;
when the patient is pressed, and if the thread is cut from the foundation, then the treatment is light; and it is that you press them with your nail or with the tongs, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron. If it happens that you must treat the fracture in this manner:
If it happens that you must treat the fracture in this manner: Take a thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread to the other side and make the needle pierce from the other part, and turn the two parts of the thread around the needle, and let it be of the width;
and pull the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to stop the excessive flow of blood;
then put on the wound a moistened cloth dipped in oil or in cerate, and apply it to the wound, and instruct the patient that he should rest;
and then let it be until it adheres, and when they have adhered, then treat with bandages and other treatments, until he is healed.
Dryness of the dung or foundation Many times there is dryness of the dung in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is not of value. It is necessary that you stop at the point of a spit or on one nail the flesh of the soles, which does not let it get moist. then treat it as long as it is swollen as it is necessary;
and if it cannot be treated, then rub the scratch stronger than before, until it bleeds much, and becomes scarred; then treat it as long as it is wounded.
of a tremor Furuncle is a small false appearance in the body, and goes much deep within;
and sometimes it perforates the flesh, and one feels it like death from a tremor, and it comes into the whole body, and more to the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a vein from a wing of a goose, or a wing of a strong cult, and put that vein on the forehead, so that the circles surround the forehead entirely; then turn your hand to take the entire vein so that you bind entirely around the forehead, and put it in depth, and scratch the forehead from its roots.
And if you see, make this of a vein of copper or iron in this form, and let it be subtle below and drawn above: nor pierce, for it will hold by itself, and press by itself.
And if you see, cauterize the forehead, as it is described before in the chapter of cauterization.
Sometimes one makes a clyster of silver or gold, or of melted copper or enameled;
and sometimes they make these swellings small and large, according to what they are applied to. Thus then one applies it in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Thus then one applies it in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small. The shape of the cluster small and large is thus wide, where the belly is tied in this manner:
and it has a dislocation where the belly should be tied, as you see, and the breast should be pierced within;
and it has on one of the sides two perforations, and in the other one;
and let the belly or stomach be filled with medicines of a beast's bladder or of parchment, and let it be pierced all around with many small perforations, and let there be between each perforation one thread of space, then put in these perforations one strong thread of twisted hemp cord, and assemble the belly as if it were a sack; and when the medicine is inside, then thread it to the instrument in front of a strong string, then give an enema;
and this is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or with egg white, or a similar thing, then insert it gently; then the minister closes his hands together as long as it is all seen, then removes the clyster, and raises the patient's legs to his shoulders, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it come out as much as it can; and if he sleeps a night nearby, it is more great aid.
And if you give a clyster for a sickness of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to come out, then recommend it as long as he is healthy.
And if the morbid matter is in the foundation, or the abscess, it should be as subtle as for a child;
and this is the form of a subtle cluster where the skin is tight:
We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds;
now we will tell you about the treatments by hand and by medicine, according to the case.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the limbs or places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and cut of sword and of knife, or of spear or of stick or of shaft, or of similar things;
or that are made according to the limbs of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its own chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess: if it happens that the hemorrhage of the cephalic membrane is so if there comes little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the contrary side of the injured part;
and forbid the patient a fullness of wine and of fat meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, his food should be diminished, and he should not drink wine, nor eat any meat;
and put on the wound, if abscesses or ulcers come, a cotton cloth moistened with oil or rosé wine soakage, or in styptic vinegar;
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
and if the wound has been touched, then put on some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
And if the wound is large, such as a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be assembled by stitches, then assemble them by suturing, as I will describe for wounds of the belly, concerning the suturing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it stinks, and does not hold but for a little, then cauterize it; Then cure the wound with medicine, and restore harsh flesh to the leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as roasted and fried meat, also like birds, and similar things.
And if you find rot on the leather, and it does not adhere to the bone, then scrape off all the rot, and apply force, then cure it.
and if it has become arterial in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be staunched with medicine, seek the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread. and if that does not benefit, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put in this powder which dries just as the arsenic would have done.
And the method of the powder is this: Take a pinch of incense a part; Blood of dragon two parts; vital cypress three parts, and powder subtly, and apply to the wound, and extract firmly, until it adheres well and joins with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it without unraveling, so it does not become inflamed; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes this ointment of cypress alone, when one does not have incense or blood of dragon, but that the wound has not been treated with arsenic.
And if the arsenic has touched the wound, likewise in this case, do not put any of this powder;
but rather apply some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until the wound is entirely scabbed; then heal other wounds as long as he is healthy.
And if a bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pinches;
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the artery of the neck or the vein is cut.
If it is the artery, then there is no other treatment than to leave it alone, and do not apply anything constricting, for it harms the arteries and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the arteries is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member;
But let the medicine be soothing, as if warm water is poured into sweet oil, and mixed with rose oil, and warm water is poured also into sweet oil, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moistenings are applied.
And if the wound is large, then sew it with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then pierce above or lower at the flesh;
and if the artery is cut, and with flowing blood comes, then dissect, and ligate, and cauterize, this is the business;
and if the vein of the throat is cut, or the artery, and the conduits are preserved, through which the food goes, then sew the artery to the rope of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then he tightens the bandage, and lets it be for some hours, then he cures the dislocations of the shoulders until they are healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, thus the cartilage; and if there are fragments of bone, thus the shattered parts you can remove, and that which you cannot remove, leave until the wound suppurates, and is cleansed and freed from the pus;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have spoken of. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become festered, then cure it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a blow of a spear or of a knife, and the wound is deep, then examine the wound for signs of what the patient will endure: Know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it with the blood that does not stay in depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but I put on a attracting ointment, and bind it to him twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put in the wound a lot of cotton to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more; if no spasm comes, nor trembling of the heart, and there are no signs of strangulation; and when you see the bones in their proper place, then know that the wound is healed. Heal the thenar of tentions and other treatments, as long as it is healthy;
and if it cannot heal, and becomes open, show that it has fistula;
if the treatment is as one ought. And if the wound is an incision of a sword or a knife, and it is simple, or in the thigh or on the back, then the treatment of that which is in front; if it is large, with stitching;
and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and in a mass of crushed pieces, thus treat the wound, and the torn fibers if they are separated; and if they are not separated, then let the wound rot, to facilitate the extractions;
and for other wounds of other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
Drop of the rupture of the belly
The drops from the rupture of the belly are great and menacing and small;
of the large wound often issues the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, because of the entanglement of the entrails;
and the stitching is more troublesome, and often worse than the small wound that of the large one, because one has to put back in place the intestines with more points, as one puts them back in hot from hot;
because the intestine swells as soon as it feels the cold, if they are put back in place with more points, and for this reason the middle wound is worse, because one has to put back the intestine in its place that the other two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
the two common stitches have in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of the other wounds of the body and the other special stitches are common to the other wounds;
and all ways they are more suitable with the cuture of the belly, and I will say to each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and a thing of the intestine comes out, and it's difficult to put it back, it is by one of the two methods: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is weakened by the cold.
And when it is frozen, warm it in such a manner: wet a sponge or a cloth in hot water only, or you heat it in hot broth and caper and pepper, and apply it to the intestine as long as the swelling is reduced;
and sometimes this brings constriction, and it is necessary to loosen in order to reduce the swelling.
And when you see the obstruction departing, anoint the intestine with water or oil and evil humors are cooked, for by this the entrance is alleviated a little of the thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument through which one collects the evacuations;
and the first treatment is to move the stone, that we must not cut unless there is great necessity for it;
and these are the instruments for cutting:
cut within the body and do not cut through, and see to it the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine is healthy, then put it back in its natural form in its own place, if you have the power to do so, for this is a good cure.
When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part near the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the belly, place the head and the chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts then put attention to that which the injured part is higher than the other;
and therefore it is necessary to administer what I say for large and minor wounds.
For small wounds, put what is appropriate for you, then take it between your hands and apply the ointment that touches all the rupture with its hand, and bring together the edges;
and this is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound two threads of space, and stick a needle where it has a strong thread tight; and pierce the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the thread, which is underneath the leather, until you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two ends of the thread with the four ends assembled;
Then strain from a double thread between the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound together, and then leave the thread of the suture, and fix another needle;
Then thread the second thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to your skill with needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be moderate, between fine and coarse, for fine needles catch all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well: for this reason it is necessary that they be moderate;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and the skin, so that they do not catch and close the wound before the suture;
and then catch the heads of the needles, so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put tents or dressings on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this manner of treatment is more suitable for small wounds, for it is enough to have one or two needles.
The second treatment is common, and it is that you join the two parts of the skin and the two parts of the fascia together with one needle or where there is one strong middle thread;
and when you have pierced these parts all four together, then bring the needle back to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes;
and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a little finger;
this stitching suits a man, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was wounded by a blow, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and it came out of the intestines as thick as two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been outside for 23 hours, and the wound was sewn until the 15th day, and I treated it, and it became healthy.
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I applied to the wound cotton soaked in water twice a day, and I bathed him with warm milk until he was healthy.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of cauterizing:
Take the needle, and thrust it into the part until you reach the inner core;
when it has pierced the right heart directly, then leave the head of the suture or cauterizer where you thrust the needle, and make it pierce another part of the inner core until it comes out;
and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as well as the tailor makes the felt, and that you leave once the seam of one side, and take it from another, until the suture is entirely completed.
The second manner of suturing, which the Gauls call their own, is thus: as some do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one edge of the seam to the other edge, in such a way:
Fix a needle or the point of the mirror at the protruding edge, and make it pierce only the flesh, and leave the two edges of the seam; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part just to the inner edge, between the two edges of the seam;
then make it pierce one and the other of the outer part just to the inner edge, in the two other edges of the mirror that are on the other side;
and it is the most common manner of fracture and the most frequent.
Galen says that one must sew up the belly with 2 needles, where there is thread in each;
and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew gloves;
and it is known that when the intestine is in the middle of the belly, then the suturing is more troublesome than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as the artery has moved, then put back the intestine, and the gut;
then apply the powder made from charcoal, and if the artery has been moved, then put on some ointment that is at hand, until the wound heals; and they tighten the thread, and sew up the suture, and the bandage. then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicines, apply to it, as much as the beginning of the gum of cotton wool, and anoint it twice a day until it is healed.
For you have no need for other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not become putrid in the main members, then it is necessary that you moisten a light leg with oil of tempered heat, or with rose oil, and apply it to the groin, and disolve around the armpits;
and if he feels pain or ulceration in the belly, and it often happens, then give a clyster of black wine, and also if the ulceration reaches to the intestine;
and pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the abundance of veins that are in it, and the delicacy of the entire body, and the closeness of its nature to the kidneys.
And if the intestine heals from the wound, then it is reset back as it was before, while it is still fresh;
and if it is old and has turned towards black or dark, then you must lacerate the part that has turned black, so that corrupted blood does not come from it, for there are veins and arteries in it;
then cut what is between the ligament, and put the two bones hanging from the part below the wound until the time to alleviate the extraction when the intestine and the wound close.
of the rupture of the navel
When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some cases, for I have seen that a man was pierced through the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus issued the digestion and the flatulence;
I put a cure according to what I could, and did not cease to treat subtly until he was healthy, and the wounded places were sound.
And when I saw him well, I doubted that the patient had a bad thing in his stomach; and he did not have a point of pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in a certain manner: Take the frayed ends of large wounds, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the frayed ends have covered the mouth, put it on the lips, so that it constricts its mouth shut;
and then sew the head, and it holds so that it cannot come undone, then put another frayed end on in the same manner as before, until the wound is all taken in; and cut the wound.
This head if it becomes entrenched in the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is sewn from the intestine of an animal, in this manner:
Take the head of this thread of intestine that is very clean, and then tie to the head of this thread a thread of flax subtly twisted, then put the thread on the needle, and sew the intestine, and return it into the bowel;
and this manner of treatment of wounds is not better than following the path of experience and hope;
and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the intestinal organs, there is no skill or health, except for subtlety.
of a fistula or whatever it may be Be aware that every wound or abscess, when it suppurates, is universally called "fistula", and especially when it is hollow and has a cavity.
And a fistula is, according to true and nodding observation, a hard and white node, where one does not feel pain, and is as hollow as the bone of a bird;
and sometimes it has a clear and hollow cavity, and other times it is dense; sometimes little, and other times sufficient;
and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed, and there is no scar, it is not outside of one of the VIII causes: it is to be known, by the smallness of the flow of blood or of the body; or because of its wickedness; or because it has a hard crust inside, and on the lips, which does not allow a scar to form; or it has too much swelling; or the limb is rotten, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good for the cure; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the property in the region is that digestion is slow, and health is slow, and it is weakened by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the symptoms, and the treatments of medicines in this section.
Therefore it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is made by work of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the kidneys, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to certain of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous sanitation, and there is no labor but trouble and ignorance;
and if it has any fistula that does not come near the place I have spoken of, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to examine it, take a probe of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, if you seek;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of fluff, because the fluff will fold into the twist;
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot well examine it with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, because the moisture from one opening to another cleans and purifies;
then feel it carefully with your thumb, to see if there is bone or nerve, and if it is deeply seated, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press, and the place where he feels it;
and when you truly know the limb where it is, and if it is loose from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the limbs that I have told you, then cauterize according to what I have told you, and remove the faulty and corrupted flesh that are within;
and then the cure as long as it is healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated straight through, then you should cauterize deeply as much as you can, then put moist tents with sharp medicine, and push them just to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then I put ointments on healthy flesh, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy by that, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
If a vein or nerves are not troubling the main limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it as long as the corrupted part is entirely cut away, then treat the diseased and painful flesh until it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and the wound remains as before, be aware that you are not successful until the end of the treatment;
if it becomes uncovered and seek as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb;
and if it is thus healthy, it is good. If this is not so, be aware that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; if there is no other remedy than to let nature take its course;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with forceps, then extract it with the suitable instrument for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull out all but one;
and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cauterize and reset and heat, and release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound a warm poultice of rotten material, and let it stay until the limbs are rotted around the bones, and then they will be easier to extract the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg, then raise only the corrupted part until the blackness is all bony, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes just to the marrow of the bone; then it is necessary to cut and cauterize right to the corrupted part, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of around thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body, so that the materials came to the leg, and he was afflicted with a large abscess, and there was no visible cause for it to burst open.
but the doctors in their foolishness made an incision so high that the abscess burst open, and a lot of material flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many perforations came that poured out both bowel and body moisture;
and many doctors treated him for two years, and he had no skill in the art of hands, so that I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what was flowing out through the perforations from his body; and the body of the young man became red, and it had a yellowish color.
I pushed a probe into one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one vein came against the other from all parts of the leg.
I then hastened, and cut into one of the openings as much as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption went right to the bone within;
I showed what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except for that which I had removed;
and began to treat the wound with soothing medications for a long time, and could not suture;
and then began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, and showed it, and then removed it, and prepared to suture the limb; but I did not touch the inside of a palm of the hand, and pulled the thread according to its whole size, then restored it with medications; and it was healed and quickly, and there was no need to restart the work because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For by the evacuation of blood it often happens, but it was completely healed, and a hard lump formed on the hand, and it was of good disposition and had no discomfort nor any hindrance in anything, neither in movement nor in coming.
And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it is necessary to treat it in this manner: take the bandage, and bind it at the head of the bone that is broken, and instruct him to hold it up high; and put another bandage on the thigh thicker than the first one, and tie it around the flesh that is above the bone, and stretch the skin, so that you draw the corrupted flesh to the bottom, and discover the flesh on the limb where you see the sore, so that the sore does not touch the flesh.
and put a splint or a pad behind the bone to support the corrupted flesh;
and it is necessary to see and feel the corruption as much as one can, and even another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh;
then put a splint behind, and then draw from one part to the other the corrupted place, and let the dressing be as long as the corrupted area, as we have said;
and if there is corruption in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and be the bone or it contains from the other part;
and if the corruption is in the connection of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut;
and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand, or in the knuckle of the foot, it is a very strong thing, but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire into this corrosion, as it appears to you; and clean it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or the nerve do not cause a contrary condition;
and know that the cutting and the seams for cutting these bones are many, according to the size of the bones and the appearance of the holes, and their thickness and their thinness, and their largeness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, it is necessary to prepare each similar tool of work;
and you will know that the work will show you the tool that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; if you prepare the tool that you need according to what is necessary for it.
The head is dislocated either by internal cause or by external blow;
and when you have treated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they are not beneficial, then it is necessary to amputate that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes either by death or by wickedness, which is greater, from the defect of the member;
and the signs are that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire, and after the blackness, then come those corruptions of member into member, and spread throughout the whole body;
If you hasten to the copper, and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as the scorpion of the sea and viper and similar things, if the corrosion is at the head of the pain, if you touch it, and do not give space to come near the hand.
And if it comes near the hand, then touch it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, then touch it at the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy stronger than the quantity of its virtue;
and all this I do when the corrosion reaches the foot: if it reaches the first joint, then touch after the next joint;
and if it reaches the foot, then touch the entire foot; and if it goes up into the leg, then cut at the joint of the knee;
and if it comes from above the knee, then there is no other remedy for the patient but to die from the thigh wound;
and the way to cut or saw the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one assistant with the lower limb, and another assistant with the upper limb, and you sever the flesh that is between the two limbs at a wide spatula, as long as the bone is exposed;
then cut or saw, and put on each part a dressing of linen, so that the saw does not touch the healthy flesh, and comes to the patient another lesion and painful abscess.
And if a flow of blood comes when you make an incision, then cauterize the flesh immediately, or apply some restraining powders;
Then return to your medicine as long as it is accomplished, then tie the injured limb with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it is healthy;
and I will tell you what happened to the man in his dream:
he had a blackness that seemed like embers of fire, and this corruption first came into his right foot, so much that it took over the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to amputate the foot, and was healthy;
and long time after, the corruption returned to his right hand, and he came to me, and I applied to him things that push back after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corroisons;
and he wanted me to amputate the hand, but I refused, because I had hope of pushing back the matter; and he doubted that if he cut his hand, it would not die, for the virtue of the arm was weak;
and he despaired of both, and returned to his land, and ceased to cover his hand, and was healed;
and I have not seen it happen except when one makes another part, if one is a master of the trade.
Sometimes an abscess comes in the flesh and remains so long that it makes a large gathering of pus; and then breaks and bursts, and out comes the pus, and remains in the flesh a hole, like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as delicate as a silken cloth, and does not adhere to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such an illness is called " eczema", and is not called "fistula";
but if it is so stretched that it comes right up to the bone in depth, then it is called a "fistula";
and the skin is so that you cut that skin all around, and likewise when it is thin, like a delicate sheet; and does not heal because of its corruption.
And if you have made the skin heal, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a cluster:
look if the abscesses are large, and the bowel which is in it is of foul odor, then cluster with the medicine of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: take arsenic, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put the skin in a vessel on the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take from this according to necessity, and make it into a sharp point and in the middle, and insert the syringe, and hold the perineum; and let the medicine sit for 2 hours, then extract it by squeezing;
do this many times, until the chest is cleaned and the pus is removed;
and sometimes the syringe is made sharp with ashes, when this medicine is not available, and it is that you take ashes of vine shoots, and sharpen them above, then filter them, and inject, until you know that the chest is well cleaned;
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the sharp ashes, then inject with a sharp and pointed instrument where it has a bit of melted litharge; You anoint with honey and mixed wine, that the honey has properties of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes the blood rise;
and when you have done this, and you have seen that the blood is well purified, then anoint with what makes charcoal appear in it, and that you take a plaster of diafinit, and make it with rose oil and wine;
or you anoint with certain medications and with oils, of which I have mentioned the properties or treatments of the oils;
and if the hole in the breast is small, and the cane of the syringe cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with a needle, and put in a tent made of Egyptian ointment or royal ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave only as much room as the syringe can enter, and if the hole that the bowel protrudes from is above, then cut below where it is.
and if you cannot cover the belly downward as you wish, arrange it in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place it is, for when the bowel is deep, do not let it protrude outward and if you cannot cover the belly downward as you wish, arrange it in such a manner: that the bowel may run lightly downward, and nothing of the bowel is left behind;
that the bowel may run lightly downward, and nothing of the bowel is left behind; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and apply them to a linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cover the forces of the wound inward with a poultice as large as the first, then apply ointment sufficiently on another cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the belly to alleviate it, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days once;
and he who is above the hole of the sink, often opens the belly, and knows what comes from the belly, if it is venom or poison or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take warning if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine is in such a manner extended and you see the nature that comes from the hole of the sink, then know that the sins are open, and approach the health;
and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, if change one dressing for another, and renew the application.
And if subtle poisons cut after long tension, do not despair of the health, for the health approaches.
For there are men whose tardiness causes harm to their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if his bowels are not digesting the food that comes from the body after several days, it is a sign that the body is not being evacuated;
and if his body is slow to evacuate, and it is delayed, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diafoin ointment, for there is a large portion of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take diafoin ointment, and make it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine in substance;
then prepare the jam and use it;
and this same thing makes a cooked honey thick, when diafoin ointment is not available, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it over the honey when it is on the fire;
and then apply the plaster, and spread it over the breast, and sometimes administer to them aristolochia, and roots of lis celeste, which is as effective as flour of vetches and centaury; and in the use of simples or compounds: crush them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I mentioned, and use;
and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the sinews; if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
Panaritium is an abscess that grows under the nail of the finger of the hand, or of the foot, or by accident grows in other toes;
and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, then there comes an aposteme of the foot, and running and discharge of pus as long as it runs to the root of the nail, and by chance it discharges entirely;
and there come corroisons next to the bone, as long as there comes a painful swelling, and the head of the pain is wide, and the color is putrid.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment is of no benefit, then it is necessary that you cut with iron all the excess flesh that remains from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are of great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh, and causes discomfort, and pain, then it is necessary that you put something under the nail that touches the flesh, and pushes it upwards, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to destroy everything; Then heal the joints as long as they are healthy.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out, and apply force, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
and if you see the tooth rotting, cut it out, in the same way as it was said before, then heal the area as long as it is healthy;
and if it is broken, and swollen, and it causes great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first;
then cut the fingernail of the thumb sharply crosswise, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh which is beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, then put something on it to soothe it.
The two bones that grow in the hands of certain men by accident are all cartilaginous, and by accident one has a piece where there is bone, and sometimes one has a nail, and none of them grow at the root of the joint, or their growth is in certain nuts of the fingers.
Those that grow on one knuckle of the finger do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the finger, by accident, do move;
the size of the one that is cartilaginous is light, in a certain manner: Cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Those that grow at the root of the joint are grievous to cure: if you hold it with a copper instrument.
In that which grows on the last knuckle of the finger, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh round about to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for that, then cure it until it be sound.
The sudden pain that comes to both sides together comes from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn of fire, or from similar things.
If it is necessary that you treat the swelling, then the doctor must repair it according to its natural forms; then put between two moist towels or cloths soaked in oil or rose water, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two pieces of subtle sponge, as long as the limb is swollen, if it is necessary.
If sudden pain comes to one of his sides with the palm, then treat that swelling if it is necessary.
Ulcers are coarse, swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities that come to many members of the body;
and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the bile, and then the blood of the basilisk.
The treatment with iron is according to two methods: One is where they cup, and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you lift the vein, and pull it all out.
The incision is according to this method: Raise the first the thigh of a warm and moist limb very strongly, so that the thick blood becomes subtle, then pull the thigh from the diseased part to the hollow near the knee;
then cup the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a large incision, then elevate and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the virtue of the disease can suffer;
and then the doctor instructs him to paint himself with pitch made from black coal.
and recommends evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and is harmful to the patient.
The elevations of it are in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if it has a lot of hair, then shave it or wash it, and rub the leg with hot water as long as it becomes red, and the veins become swollen.
and if you have no bath, then heat it with fire, and then apply it directly to the vein of the thigh at the head of the knee, or in the area below the knee;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scratch the vein of each part, as long as it appears when one feels it;
and then it becomes red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems also like a white cord;
then cut the infected part, as long as it is elevated from the skin, and then anoint it with a light ointment, then cut it on the other side with three fingers;
then scratch the skin on the vein as long as it appears, then lift it with the instrument, as you have done, and anoint it with another ointment, as you have previously done;
then cut another incision, or several if you are skilled in your craft, then lift it, and cut to the finger of the foot, then pull and lift it up to the second incision;
then pull it from incision to incision, until it is completely evacuated, then cut it;
and if you cannot pull it and lift it, then put a strong double thread on the needle, and lift and pull it, and push from below the infected part, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out; and guard that she does not fall, for if she falls, one cannot draw it out or lift it, and it comes to harm the patient;
and when you have drawn it all out, put on the place of the wound a moistened linen cloth in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the foot is contracted and twisted and wrapped up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must untwist it, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously said.
The shape of the iron tool with which one cuts the foot is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein;
and is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in land that has no moisture;
and by chance it grows in other parts than the legs, and this comes from the decay that rises from under the skin, as it comes from within the body of snakes and worms, growing between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation appears in the leg, then the flesh becomes swollen, and the vein starts to protrude, like the root of a plant.
When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plaster two and a half inches thick, and the knee, and leave the plaster on the leg, and every time it falls off, then rewrap the plaster and the bandage.
and if it is too long, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely removed; for if you cut it, then it enters into the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction on the limb, and a bad disease;
because of which thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body;
and it happens sometimes with this vein when it is treated with 5 fingers of length, or of 10, and a man comes to me, from whom it issues from 10 fingers of length, and when you cut it, then push the vein or the perforation, and pierce it until the bottom, so that everything goes out;
and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and apply to the limb medicines that promote putrefaction for no day, then treat it as with abscesses.
And often to this vein come pains and aches, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or of the knee, where many injuries occur, and from which the pains come.
Cure the ills as we have said before.
of worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "disease of the maggot", because it often occurs in the intestines, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body rising and descending, and can be felt well by going from limb to limb, until it breaks through the skin where it appears, and falls out.
and is caused by the putridness of certain humors, such as come worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly;
and he doubts his own illness, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it cure and treat, one cannot be certain that when it goes:
then it is necessary that you bind the joint above and below with a strong string tightly, then cut on and treat further, and if the vein is deep in the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize with fire, until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, hold back from him the eyebrow forcibly, then cut on, and treat further;
and it is necessary for the patient to undergo treatment of a body with solvent medicines for bad watery tumors, and beware of eating foods that cause purging.
of the pain which comes from flatulence This illness is called in our land "vankir", and is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member;
and I see what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and shortly after, I saw it move up as if a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything, like living silver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder, and then a little after runs throughout the whole body, until it comes to the other arm;
Then she told me that she would turn it inside the body, as I had seen.
I was greatly amazed at how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. However, I had seen many people who seemed to move their pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and for this reason the aforementioned constriction appeared;
and it does not appear for this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and full veins.
And when you cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said, if you lift up and press down hastily, and then cut into the skin until the aforementioned constriction at the place is forced out; and cauterize the limb;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat what causes the bloating, such as foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpent's head, and similar others.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the limbs of the body where they stick.
Their diversity is that there are some which have large heads, and small ones, and barbed, and jagged; and of those which have two edges, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are fragments;
and the one that sticks in no limb sticks according to two methods: or in a principal member it sticks, such as brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appears: if it happens that you are wary of the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases; and when a bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and the thread which is on the brain, is when there is scotoma and deafness and confusion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it is without force to the nostrils, or to the ears; and by chance hurts the word and the voice; and sore of the white moist wound resembling pus, and sore also as raw flesh;
and if there is an apparent sign, then take it for the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls or passes, are that it is near the left breast, and feels also as if it was stuck in a hard thing, not seen empty; and by chance the arrow moves like the pus, and cuts out black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: those are the signs without doubt that death will soon descend.
And the signs of the arrow that pierces the arm are that without great pain of spitting sore of the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrowhead remains in the covering of the lung, then it is detrimental to the little ribs; and gives great pain and great distress and shortness of breath; and moves the member of the shoulders entirely.
And if the arrowhead remains in the stomach, by chance if it jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the flesh.
And if the arrowhead remains in the belly, and penetrates to a point of the intestine by the round gut, then there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the arm and the elbow and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happens to me, because of what you do next.
It happened to the man that an arrow shot into his arm at the root of the nail: I pulled it out, and drew it from another part below the fat of the ear, and he was healthy without any defect.
And drew out from a wound an arrow that had entered into the fat of the eye below the eyelid, and the arrow was pushed back, and there was no pain except at the tip towards the fundament, and it was a large arrow from a Turkish bow, with all its iron without barbs;
The youth was healthy, and no evil accident came to him.
And I drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with barbs:
I shaved the beards, and subtleled as much as I could, and it was healthy for the Christians.
And I extracted an arrow from the man, which had been shot into his belly, and thought he would die;
and since it has been thirty days, his condition has not changed; I cut around the arrow, and pulled it out, and extracted it forcibly, and there was no bad accident.
And I saw the man to whom an arrow had been shot into his back, and the wound was swollen;
and the arrow remained inside him, and his natural functions were not changed, nor did I find any damage in any of his natural organs.
And I saw another man, to whom an arrow had been shot into his face, and the wound was swollen; and remains thus without suffering great pain;
and many other similar things.
And he pulled an arrow from the hand of the prince the king, which was shot in behind his nape, and was somewhat leaning to the right side; and the arrowhead was entirely lodged.
I was called to the treatment after it had been shot for three days. I found the wound very constricted.
I searched it with a subtle probe, and did not feel it; and he felt a piercing and pain under his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow, I put on the place a plaster attractive and digestive, because the limbs did not swell; and the limb appeared to me to be from the arrow.
and the limb appeared to me to be from the arrow. I put the plaster on the wound, and treated the painful injury, and remained with the patient for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead inside his body;
and it pulled it out for me. I applied to the wound caustic corrosive medicine for a long time, until it was covered, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which had adhered to the flesh;
then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it exceeded the limits within four months, and then cleared up the wound so that I joined the tendons, and the muscles on one side and the other, and it could not protrude;
then I did not cease to refine and to engineer devices, until I took the arrow by the tendons well made, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as I will describe, and restored the wound.
And the physicians judge that the gristle of the nose cannot restore: I then restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was entirely healed.
I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so apply your treatment to what I do not say, for books cannot grasp everything;
but wise masters understand well only a little of great things, and on what is present and deficient, they find new work, and new instrument, in the discernment of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs or are they fixed unless in two manners: either by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which shoots forth from the place where it enters, is an arrow entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes now comes out of the flesh.
And if it does not heal now, then let it be until the flesh is purulent inside, and the pus is released;
and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot be released, then let it be for some days, and move it each day;
and then it will heal, and if it does not heal, then pierce inside with a very subtle instrument, until the limbs inside are enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrowhead is lodged in the limb of the body so that one cannot see it, then search for it all over the area. and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then probe as far as the wound is large.
and pull the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow a part that it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck between the two parts of the muscle that you pull, and then break or crush the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out;
and subtly, so that you do not break the arrow, that you pull it more gently.
And if you cannot at one time, then leave it until the surrounding flesh is softened, then pull it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood makes you oppose, then remember what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision near the nerve and the vein, and devise a way that you can pull the arrow without danger, whether it is swollen or tender, or firmly or gently;
And place the patient according to the form it was when the arrow fell in, for that is the greatest aid that it should be, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears to be something of it, or the skin is swollen in that spot if one sees or feels it obviously.
Cut then upwards, as far as the clamps can grasp, and then extract it. If it comes out now by itself.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand round, as far as it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out;
and if there is a remainder of the arrow, push it all the way through;
and if the bone is fractured, and you want to administer a poultice, if you administer the poultice with a heated instrument, then the point of the arrowhead enters into the flesh of the instrument;
and then apply forcibly, and if the arrow is extracted, then you apply the instrument to the point entering inside, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, if you can, then treat the wound as it is necessary.
And if the arrow fractures in the foot or the thigh or the belly or the bladder or the ribcage, and it is near the surface, and you can cut above, then you cut;
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if it is necessary; and the treatment until she is healthy.
The shape of the tongs with which one treats the arrowheads are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And they come in many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the pointed instrument is like a bird's feather, for pushing to the point of the arrow, as this is the shape:
The veins from which one bleeds are 31, of which there are 16 at the head, that is to say: 2 vessels that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries which are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the little vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two sinews which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the neck, and lay people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "median", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and lay people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side of the body, and the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is near the ribcage, and it is the one that they bleed from, which visibly appears on the abdomen.
And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the thumb and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and on the foot there are three veins: one is beneath the curvature of the left side of the belly, and the second is the saphena which is at the shin of the right side; and the vein that is called "nescia", which is on the shin of the other side;
and in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
The bleeding of the veins that are near the ears helps ancient catarrhs and migraines;
and the qualities of the blood, as I tell you, and it is that you should raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then constrict the patient's neck to a vice, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two places depending on the head: bend then your arm, and where you feel the pulse under your arm, it is a sign of strangulation;
then take the lancette, and push it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand at all the vein above, and cut and the skin and the vein well with two fingers of across, and make blood come out as much as you see;
then constrict and lift it, until it is healthy;
and I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is equivalent to the ancient migraine, and headache, and customary ophthalmia, and at the expense of the sharp tears from the eyes;
and the quality of the blood is thus as I say: and it is that the patients stretch their neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and feel the pulse of the right arm, and then examine the thumb;
then raise the heart on the vein above your right index finger, and push the needle through, and raise the vein above, and cut it, just as you have done with the other veins, and make flow the blood according to your necessity;
then release the patient, and put your right hand on the vein for an hour, then apply a dressing; and then form the scar, and let it be until it is healed;
and we have already spoken of their treatment and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
The bloodletting from the frontal vein is as valuable as the bloodletting of the head for ancient facial diseases, and for migraine, and for redness;
and the quality is such that the disease constricts the throat by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "incisor", of which this is the form:
And put the point on the vein, and press down with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and leave the vein until it is healed and sometimes close it with a wide bandage.
In no way does it matter if the flames are too sharp; and the vein is pierced, because the bone is near, and by chance the flame breaks when it is subtle.
The veins of the two arms which are in the two shoulders aid the eyes, and the tongue, and the redness, and the hearing in the ear, and the illnesses of the face;
and the quality of their vein is such that the patients strain their neck twisting some ligament, as before;
then the vein, and let the vein be pierced, a little below the length of the flame a little wide, because there is no point to burn. And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
then make an incision of blood, as much as you have in your profession, and then sew on the wound, and sew it well.
The blood of the vein from which it is born if it is worth to take, and to remove the excess, and for diseases of the face, such as emigraine and erysipelas that come on the face, and mainly when it is ancient;
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient squeezes their throat, then squeezes their vein to the left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and puts it between the lips in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not appear well, and the blood will start to flow now;
and do not go too deep, and make it flow with blood according to its necessity, then let it alone for a night, for it is very quickly restored;
The blood of the two galls helps with the stretching of the shoulder, and the starting of digestion, and many diseases, and for epilepsy, and for ulcers, and for herpes, and eczema;
and the qualities of the blood are such that the patients strain their neck from one side to the other, as we have said;
and let the masters be at the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat, then cut the vein of the elbow a little widely, then let out some blood moderately, or as much as is necessary;
then perform the same on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and constrict both veins moderately, so that the patient does not suffocate; and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be clean.
of the bleeding of the liver The bleeding of the veins in the lips from above is indicative of disorder in the mouth, and corrosion of the gums, and fissures of the lips, and pain in the teeth and inside.
And the quality of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them are small black veins:
cut then one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each part, and also make it so for the veins that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
of the blood beneath the tongue The blood of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the blood of the head, and it is for the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks downwards on each side for a black vein:
Feel then one and the other, and do not press too deeply, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that one feels commonly are felt in two ways:
or by pricking to the whole flame of the fire, or by subtle olive oil as if cutting tendons, and it is called "anesil"; and are coarse and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame of the fire is very renowned, and is large as you see:
And it has the function to open the full veins that have a lot of visible thick blood, and which contain thick blood and sediment; and it is the form of the flame of olive oil
and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for cauterizing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
The cauterization of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are in the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
and it is necessary for the cauterizer to cauterize carefully, and to beware of the artery that is beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one should not be pricking with the flame, but rather touching gently.
And if the basilica does not appear manifestly, then it is necessary that you dislodge it, and change to another; or you want any vein of his, or you feel in his arm the vein with the blood it appears manifestly; and it cuts into the flesh of the patient, as we have said.
And if you examine the arm of the patient, then it is necessary that you stretch the arm, that you touch the arm as long as you know the pulse; then mark the arm from below, and then bend the arm, and cut the vein of the flesh of the patient; and beware that you do not wound the artery when you see the arm swollen, for it is related to the artery: examine the gift.
And if you see it spurt out high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood of the artery: Hasten then, and put your finger upon it for a long time, then remove your finger if it is without strain, which often happens; Raise the arm, and let it be, and do not move it the patient;
and let it be on a poultice, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if it is without strain, and it is of use to you, and the medicine is not prescribed for you, then cut the artery which is open, because the head of the disease is withdrawn; and strain the joint.
And take a splint of fistula, and tie it, and take one of the mallets and bind it well next to the other joint;
If the joint is strained, it is good; if not, then heal it, as we have said, with powders that constrict blood;
and the stitches are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the position of the joint of the arm.
The blood of the vein in the middle helps since it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basile and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon that he be aware of the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply, and he touches the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the patient's condition becomes grievous, and by chance he cannot heal;
and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in any man due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you know the sinews of the instrument; and avoid the nerve with your hand.
And if it is a vein between the two nerves, thus make an incision of its length.
The bloodletting of the head helps, which draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed at the olive vein or at the martian vein, for it is the safest of all veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery. In any case, it is necessary to take the lighter limb, and not touch anything unless one fails the first time, and then one resumes; and by chance one inflames the limbs of certain men, when one fails the first time, but it does not harm.
The quality of the bloodletting is according to one's thought.
The first thing that you must know about bloodletting is that bloodletting is not done for the sake of preserving health, but to avoid upcoming illnesses;
and let the bloodletting be done on one of the three veins that are on the thigh: these are to know, the cephalic, the middle and the basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, in autumn and in April after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three times a day.
The bloodletting that is administered for illnesses has no determined hour, but that it should be done when need is, by day or by night, at all hours and in all tensions;
and it is not necessary to bleed children up to thirteen years, nor a woman carrying fruit for less than four months up to seven times. Nor should the old who have passed sixty years be bled.
And when some wish to purge themselves, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that they empty the bowels of a light clistere, if they have retained many bad humors, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful intestines to the principal members.
Nor does he purge himself well who is too full of meats, nor one who is dropsical, as long as he is in a fever, or having the dropsy.
and he warns one to purge himself after a colic passion, and vomiting, and corruption of the stomach, and multiplication of bitter humors in a woman, and from travail, from waking and from fasting, and that which defeats all virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body;
then refine the humors, if they are not thick, with meats and with beverages and with medicines, you will have them thin in a short time.
Then enter into the bath, if nothing else helps, to thin out the blood, and to cleanse the vein of the body from the inside, as we have said;
and keep away from him the things that cause labor, and pain, and dislocation, and similar things;
and be joyful and happy, and let the healthy area be higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull the vein downwards, for when it is too narrow or wide, it cannot be corrected;
and then rub the body with the hands, until the veins swell, and feel them;
Then soften the healthy area with a little old oil, then put his right hand on the left vein below the body a little where he wants to treat, so that the vein is not hurt and fails to be cauterized.
For there are veins that are as tight as cords to the sausage, and if it is of such that are full of gas, so that when one puts on the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is one of those. and if it opens the vein, the wound is too tight, for which it is necessary that the sausages be advised in these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good; if not, then one recommences a little below that place or above the handle, if the limbs are not swollen.
And if the limbs are swollen and the patient is in a hurry, let it be one or two days, and do not tie up the arm: for it may happen that abscesses will come out.
Do not enter into the bath, then recommend the enema if it pleases them;
and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not be as much blood as you see, then make that same perforation in the entire flame directly;
and hold the limb back a little, so that the joints are weakened; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the limb weakened, do not recommend the enema, and put on a little of oil of rose, for it alleviates the body from blood, and is bad in this limb that which the oil does;
and then administer the oil of rose in every enema that you apply to the veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same thing causes a triangular and bulging of the eyes, when one puts it on the back; if subtlety cuts the sense and separates when it is too thick.
And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not properly cleaned except for the time when the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and put on the back a damp sponge in water and vinegar for a little while, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the back after some hours a black or green spot, do not touch it; and if you see, put on something of aloes or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastick, or similar.
And often there occurs an abscess and swelling at the wound of the basilic vein:
then put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the compression of the hand, this is that bad swelling. Beware then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it happens by chance to cut short the artery;
but make a dry plaster for to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healthy.
And draw from each one blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it be until it becomes refined; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is weak and weary, and has need of blood extraction, that a larger wound be made to them, and their veins be made larger;
and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking;
and this manner of bleeding is free from corruption of blood and accumulation of dirt, and is better than the bleeding from a deep or large wound.
And for the one whose body needs to be bled, it is necessary to give them a drink made from the juice of crushed pomegranates; if they are bilious, give them three or four times blood; and if they are of a cold complexion, mix before the bleeding a drink with syrup made from honey, or with aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-scented syrup.
And if it comes to the blood vessel, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he takes broth made from flesh, and sweet-smelling syrup, and uses other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to bleed from his arm, and to bleed another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little and a little, according to the quantity of his continuing strength.
And he who wants to bleed from his arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong body, should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to bleed from another part, should bleed on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body that is already heated and causes fever; If it happens to pull out a large quantity, and to widen the hole so that it reaches the stomach; then you inspect all the conditions of the wound, and put your hand on his buttocks when it bleeds, so that death does not come into the bowel, and this happens many times, when the bleeders are neglectful;
and it happens not at all when you see the arm become dislocated, and blood comes out the second time, and the hole is closed, that you press firmly upwards; nor if it is curved, that he should stretch the arm violently, for this would be harmful;
but let it be until it bleeds a second time; or you put the point of the flame to the tip of the vein, until the blood that is coagulated in the hole of the wound comes out, and put on a little warm oil, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess has subsided.
And if a second bloodletting is necessary, perform it on the same arm, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the middle of the arm is bled from the vein of the head because it is connected.
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in cold water, until the flesh becomes reddened;
then it should be wrapped moderately, so that the vein appears well, then bleed now across, neither too wide nor too long;
and let the incision be wide, and let it be bled close to the joint of the hand, and if blood does not flow out, then put the hand back in cold water, and let the blood run into the water, until you have enough;
and if it is summer, do not put your hand in hot water, for they are more likely to put it in winter than in summer;
and the blood of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither an artery nor a nerve.
The blood of the little finger of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
bind the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen, so that one can see it; and if it is a transverse wound, and if you cut through everything from top to bottom, do not cause any grief;
and do not go too deep in the flesh, for the nerves are scattered throughout and detached from the skin, and then put the hand in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot flow out.
And when you have let blood as much as necessary, then put oil on the vein and seal it with a bandage immediately, and do this for each vein.
The vein in the left hand is useful for the disease of the spleen, and do everything just as I have told you regarding the right.
The vein of the spleen is useful for all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the liver, and retention of fluids, and disease of the kidneys, and of the thighs and of the old hams and similar diseases.
And the quality of its vein is that it makes the disease go from the foot to the cold leg, and rubs on the vein as long as it hurts, and loosens above the joint of the foot; and this vein is at the calf, and above the foot many veins go to the kidneys;
Let the wound be then or more wide, at the shins or at the ankle, where it is most needed.
And if you treat the wound on the foot, beware of the tendons that are disordered, and the sinew that passes across as in cutting.
and let the flames be anesthetized.
And if the blood cannot issue out, put the foot in a warm water, and let the vein be well purified.
And if the bloodletting fails the first time, recommend the second at a little distance, for the limbs are salty.
Do not be afraid of touching the nerve, as we have said, and thus make of the saphena vein of the other foot equally.
The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of the thigh, and its bloodletting is good for the pain of the hip, when it is because of hot blood.
And the quality of his blood is such that the patient goes into a bath, and extracts from above the ankle four fingers in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not appear;
and if it appears, then let the blood flow in all the ways that you can, and by penetrating; and it is of more value that you collect it, for the blood is healthy, and it is very useful to many men.
and it is of more value that you collect it, for the blood is healthy, and it is very useful to many men. And if you do not find it, then let blood from the one that appears at the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and make the blood flow as much as you want, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and extract; he is now bled.
Intestines are made of horns, or of arteries, or of veins;
and ventilation is done according to two methods: or by striking and extracting blood, or without striking.
And this ventilation which is without striking is according to two methods: or it is with all fire, or without fire;
and ventilation which is done by striking and by extraction of blood is done in thirteen places of the body, of which one is all in the sum at the head; and the others are in the neck; and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the ventose under the chin; and the ventose of the two shoulders; and the ventose on the knees; and the ventoses in the two arms; and the ventoses of the two legs; and the veins of the two knees;
and the venesection does not draw any blood, because of the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one does not become weak, as one does from the letting of blood from a vein; and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor to any hot application, in any disease which comes from excess, as long as the body is evacuated.
And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to perform a bloodletting, or due to habit, we administer it at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and at each time;
for there are some who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head;
and there are those who experience excess and redness in their face, and in their head, and on the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and such as spit a mouthful of blood, and have their tongue swollen, and vomit blood; and if they are among those who dream, and see in their sleep blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and measure how it is in the middle of the month, we instruct to take a purging after three hours of the day.
The saliva of the nose helps with the pain of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that it be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this purging is in place of the saliva of the head, and it is not necessary that it be used by one who is of a cold complexion, or who has diarrhea, for this causes them great harm;
and for this reason it is not necessary that the old people use it, nor those who have cold illnesses of the head.
And he who often suffers from it becomes oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the bandage a little further down due to the doubt of oblivion.
The application of the bandage on the neck is in place of the sore head and of the basilic vein, and for this reason it is useful for the constriction of the chest, and for the fissure of the channel of the forearm, and for the cough, and for the repletion.
and it is necessary to loosen it a little, because if it holds too tightly, it induces oblivion or vomiting of the stomach and of the heart.
The bandages on the two sides of the neck are useful for the pains of the head, and for eye injuries and migraines, and for strangulation, and for the pain of the roots of the teeth, and are in place of the soreness of the basilic vein.
and it is necessary that you instruct the bloodletter to press his hand on the spot, so he does not cut the artery, and does not show signs of evacuation of blood.
The bad smells from the mouth are a sign of illness of the mouth, and of corruption of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is located on the blood vessels of the two lips.
The bad smells from the shoulders are a sign of an illness that comes from heat and from fullness.
The bad smells from the elbows are as much as from the three veins of the arm, because it attracts blood from these thick veins;
and instruct the bloodletter that he should not make a cut too deep, because the limb is nude of flesh, and has nearby nerves and arteries.
The bloodletting that is on the buttocks is suitable for hemorrhoids at the fundament, and for similar illnesses, and it is necessary that the bloodletting be large, and of iron, so that it has the ability to treat well; and by chance, if it is subtle, it will break; and it makes great wounds.
The ulcers of the legs appear openly, for they attract blood from the whole body, and are worth the old pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and bring back the flesh;
and they are in place of the two hips, and of the two thighs, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring about pale color in many conditions.
The method of applying the ulcer is that you apply it first gently, and immediately afterwards, and put it firmly, and rub evenly, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appearing with the redness of blood;
then do it, and put back the ulcers, and take heed to the disposition of the body, for there are some who have such hot blood, and clear pores: If it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deeper; and suck lightly.
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to subtly open the way for the thick blood.
And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to strike the third time;
and when we want to let out a little blood, it is enough to suffice only once. And if we want much blood, we begin again often;
and if the wound is deep, strike deeply, and stop if it is that the blood flows suddenly, and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who has narrow pores, that you apply to the limbs ointments which are penetrating and resolving: If it is anointed with oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of seed of gourd.
and if it is treated with oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
And if the discharge is thick and cold, take oil of marshmallow, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
And if the one who has a tender and large pores skin, it is not suitable to apply oil, but it is suitable to wash after the application of warm rose water, or cold water, or water of mallow, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or other similar things.
And the one who has a lot of moisture, rises with ease, or with water of myrtle, and of sumach, and of similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities rise with old wine, or with water of sewage, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or with other similar things.
and it is not suitable to apply a poultice of warm bath before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two.
and it is not suitable to sleep after the poulticing, and it is necessary that he be warmed, when he must be poulticed and when he is poulticed.
And let those who are bilious be warmed, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; it is necessary that he take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuce to the vinegar, and similar things; and avoid fats, and flesh of mutton, and damp meats.
and avoid fats, and flesh of mutton, and damp meats. And those who have a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine made from old and new, and a little ginger, and a little cinnamon and small birds and pigeons.
and the more it is windy, one should drink more than eat;
and it is good to give some men a little nutmeg or musk before and after the movement of wind, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not good for those who are hot to drink it.
The bloodletting that is done without pain is that which is done on the vein of the arm, and on the elbow, and in the hollow of the belly, and on the navel and the buttocks and the loins and the thigh, because these members do not suffer from being pricked, and it does not cause more harm than to attract blood from member to member, as we put it on the breasts when the child is suckling;
To treat the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply warm poultices to the stomach and to the navel to soften the limb;
and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, then remove it by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or evacuate the stone from its place;
and let it be done when one applies it to the liver and to the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these poultices are administered empty in order to suck up the humor; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain or with hot water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a way that one fills the poultice with warm water, or with water in which one has cooked herbs suitable for this purpose.
The shape of the poultice administered to the fire is thus:
And it has two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and it has the cost on the inside of the middle of the small perforation, just as if to push a needle, and let it be of silk, sewn in front so that it does not harm the patient when putting on the limb;
and it has in the middle a rod of silk or iron across, to put an infusion, and let them be big and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them;
for the veins of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from those of the fat.
And one must then put this vein on the limb:
take the candle of wax or the plaster, and put it in the vein across the rod that is in the vein, so that the clarity be at the bottom of the vein that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the member, and let your fingers be on the perforation that we have said, so that when one wants, if the vapor goes in, and remove the ventilation.
and take the plaster as before, and recommend it often, if you have the profession.
In the ventilation then which is administered in disease of pleurisy, to all sharp, has no point of edge nor of perforation, and is not administered unless when it is full of sharp, and is put on the member as soon as.
and this is the form:
Salves are not administered unless on members where one cannot put dressings due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in the bare flesh of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar things;
and the quality of the use is that when you find sweet, delicate, and clean bandages that are on hand, take them;
and put them in a sweet bag, as long as they are familiar with it, and do not have anything in their stomachs; and then be cured of the vein and the intestine, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the bandages;
and when they are flat, and will close, if it is a joint or one can put an intestine, one puts it, for it is worth much afterwards.
If not, raise the joint from the bottom, and then from the bag, very well, and then press it;
and if the joint is too sore afterwards near the body of the bandages, then wrap it in a linen cloth in a cold bag, and put on, until the bandage is stretched;
and if his blood is multiplied, then put on a poultice made with vitriol, or gall, and similar things, until it is dried;
or you put on the body a poultice of crushed and ground beans, and let them stay until they adhere to the body, then it will staunch now;
and if you are not skilled in this profession, then take other bloodlettings.
And if the bloodlettings do not want to take, then rub the body with fresh blood, or you prick it with a needle until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
and when you see that they are falling, then powder on a little of powdered aloe and crushed celery, or cinder, and they will dry now.
Here begins the book of fractures. These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that foolish men scorn this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor have they learned from letters;
and for this reason the science is estranged in our land, for I have never found any good there;
and I know not, except that by the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have shortened it at the end, and I have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two previous chapters before.
It is necessary then that we speak in the prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and stays on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsions or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to anoint the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents you, as weakness of the body, or infancy, or old age; or if the tension is not very warm, or too cold;
and let the cold humors be treated with cool remedies, and a diet of cold fish and of pork, and do not drink wine, and let the treatment be without greasy foods, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no suspicion of hot abscess, or of matter accumulation in the limb;
If the patient returns to his previous government, he must use it.
And when the broken bone begins to mend, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that cause a large increase, or have viscosity, such as roasted game in a broth, and pork, and thighs, and feet, and stomach of a calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For a warm nourishment will repair the damage and be more beneficial for the fracture.
And know that the bones of the elderly and decrepit cannot be well mended or reunited according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but to heal, reset the bone and the large tendons that are separated and joined the limb together, so that it becomes strong as it was before; and not at all from his work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish him with thick foods, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the joint, and another while bending, as when the cutting of a feather for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the joint, and another while bending, as when the cutting of a feather for writing. And if it's a fracture with a wound, and a fracture is just a small crack.
And each manner has its own engine, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory recalls in his body;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone is by what the joint is twisted, and apparent well by swelling, and sensitive to the pressing of the hand;
and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of fracture;
but he can still have a twist, or a crack, or a small break. It is not necessary that you move the limb, but apply medicines that come next, and then constrain it now subtly.
And know that the fracture that occurs in a joint, and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them in place equally, just as abscesses of the feet come to life;
and if a hot abscess comes, then let it be until it is soothed, as long as the abscess remains hot;
then put it in place with the limb that you can lift easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of this or that where there are fragments;
Then hold tight, as it is necessary afterwards.
And if the bone in the foot is fractured, hold it with two parts, whether it's the hand or the foot, or with your hand if it's a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are disjointed, reset by all means the additions in their places in the members as you can, and beware that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and adjust well the two ends of the bones according to their true forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems that it is not quite right:
if the dressing is done properly, and it is not held too tightly, nor pressed as those do who make their work come from a warm abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient well that they should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
and take care that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the quality of a broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are different in size and in length and in shape.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar things: it is necessary to envelop them with a bandage of soft and subtle linen; and those which are thick, like the thigh and leg:
if it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the entire limb, and constrain equally from all sides, so that there is no unevenness;
then put light splints inside, three or four according to the limb, and constrain the hand a little on the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and constrain less, than the fracture then loosen a little the fracture;
and soften the bandage a little at a time, until you press a large part of the limb into place, then take another bandage, and turn it around again above the broken limb;
then return to the part below the fracture, and constrain moderately, neither too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first treatment above;
Then put between the swollen limbs padding of linen or cloths, as long as it is all even, then tie everything with a bandage above, and then put your instruments in place, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is an inflammation or abscess, then apply something that appeases the abscess with heat, and which removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
then extract with your instruments, and let it be of a mixture of a large chain reckoned wisely, or of wood from which one makes the splints, or of roots of palm, and be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the instrument which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and be as long as is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large; Then hold steady on the staves as you did in the first layer, then put a thread of cotton underneath, just like in the first layer on the bruise. The tighter it is underneath, the less there is;
and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and made of flax or linen;
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, it is a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that it have between each stave less than two fingers of space.
And if the patient is distressed by the sides of the staves after tightening on their healthy skin, then put beneath them a piece of flax or a linen plaster, so that it does not blister.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the chest is broken, I will tell you about the treatment that follows.
And know that it is not necessary to stretch these tendons on the first day when the limbs are broken. For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put these tendons under tension until after 5 days or 7, or more according to the severity of the abscess and the heat that supervenes;
and you will see the method of the ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and sprains:
and it is that you take the flour that one holds at Paris from the mill, and mix it with plenty of water, and put this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster for restoring fractures in many situations, and likewise for women and for small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster for restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the sprain: Take barberry and lady's mantle and pennyroyal and aloe and Arabic gum and moguet, a pound of each; myrrh and aloe, five pounds; of electampra eight pounds; and make into powder, and mix with oil of wolf's bane; if the temperament of the man is cold, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores the broken bones, and is beneficial to many men.
Another method of plaster that is good for a sprain: Take moguet and filipendula, a pound; myrrh and aloe, eight pounds; of acacia six pounds; Take the bolica armenic, and boil it well, and cook with water or oil of buffalo, and administer.
Another way to treat the joints and bones separated from their places, and alleviate the overriding pain, and the fracture of the bone, and the breaking: Take a new linen cloth, and the marrow in a bronze vessel and cooked oil, and put on the limb.
These plasters do not restore, but they are good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly easing the pains.
Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves, and earthworm leaves, and boil them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to make a plaster for restoring the break of the bone and for calming the swelling of the abscess. Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of oats, of each one part;
and pound, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are swollen, mix it with water of moist coriander or with water, and use it.
Another way of plaster stronger than the first, when hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of violet, and seeds of flax, balm, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and of chamomile, of all one part; and pound, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken member for restoration of force unless made of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and says it should be between two, not too soft nor too hard.
And it seems reasonable to apply to the broken limb, for restoration, warm and slightly hot things, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of applying a plaster that is good for an injury and pain: Take the mugwort and roots of decapitated plants, or feathers of birds, and viminal and equal quantities, and bruise them, and make a plaster with the mixture.
And then dissolve it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone of their limb affected; if it does not dissolve by itself in a short time. And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or relief, then hasten, and dissolve it, and remove the plaster immediately;
And take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip it in water, and lift up the limb, until the itching stops, and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry, moistened with water or rose oil, linen cloth, and tie it on with a nut, until you are sure of the aposteme's heat;
And reduce the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be alleviated, then begin with a subtle bandage, and a bit of plaster, and do not strain it as strongly as before; and dress it subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that the aposteme is hot and red and painful and swollen, all of these have been alleviated from everything, and you have need of plaster and linen, then begin again, just as you did previously.
And if it does not come to the limb of what we have said, do not force the dislocation for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture becomes solid and the adjustment of the flesh closes in;
then restrain it more than before, and bind its vein, as I have said previously;
and if you see the limb drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it; apply then a warm and cold application, every time you treat it, and let it be done each third day, and loosen the bandage a little;
by this work then cut off the nourishment to the limb, and hasten what foolish doctors do, which twist the limb improperly:
It is malicious, and such are the works of the fearful, and I do not see anything other than giving pain and doing the work properly.
Many kinds of fractures exist, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the collarbone breaks the bone adjacent to the shoulder which is dislocated from the bone, as if it were crushed or beaten; and for this reason is called this kind of fracture a "crushing".
When the sword strikes the bone from both sides with a blow, and this kind of fracture is called "absolue";
and it is the wound of these two fractures, either great or small.
And if it has a dull blow, or a split, or a blow to the hip, or a fall on the hip, or other similar things.
And if there is a piercing wound that approaches just to the membrane which is beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that is thrown back into the bone as subtle as a goat's hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to enter in, and the limbs are twisted as the blacksmiths do when they strike on the anvils; if it enters between the teeth.
And this happens more to those who have a head with moist bones, like a child's head;
and it happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are separated as from the knees; and I will speak of its place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the extraction from them, and the inquiry with tongs, and by the decayed flesh that is on them.
The resemblance of hair is known by that which when one discovers the bone, and one rubs upon it, if the black fracture appears.
In the cure of the fracture, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and stretching, and palpitations, and sharp fever, and the eyes bulging out and becoming red, and other similar things in various conditions, one cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a frightening accident, and you hope for health, then begin the treatment.
And when the navicular bone comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to uncover the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in this state, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the decayed part of the bone is corrupted, and comes the accident that we have mentioned.
And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus:
and it is that you take the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if a flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or a carbuncle, use what aid is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the carbuncles are cooled, and be assured of the flow of blood; Then it begins within the bone to twist, and it is done according to two manners of work:
One manner is that you cut at the narrow tail end in front, and this is its form:
And then one beats out the other cutting which is larger than the first.
And the second manner is that you have a number of cuttings which are different, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of hardened iron;
and in working lightly, that you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary that you pierce through it within, in such a way that you administer cuttings with caution, nor too deeply that they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the head, and should have at the point a margin or a circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
and it is necessary to have many, so that each one comes into his own place of the spine, so that you have supports throughout all the head;
and this is the form of the three types of supports:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one support on the bone, and turn to your fingers as much as you know that the bone is pierced;
then put the support in another place a little afterwards, and thus do all around, then cut with incisions the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, pincers;
and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the membrane.
And when you have pierced the bone, and extracted, it is necessary that you reset the fragment that remains of the bone to all other similar instruments, but it is necessary that it be more refined and more subtle than the other surgical tools.
and if there remains nothing of the small bones, or any chips, then lightly scrape them with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and dressings that we have spoken of.
And another manner of surgery is that which the Gauls call, which is safer; and it holds very strongly, and this is its nature. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, whether it be broken or bruised, so that when you have discovered that part, then put at the head of this surgical tool, a lancet, of which this is the shape:
And do not cut on one side, and the affected part is in two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then make a small hammer blow above, so that you gently cut the bone all around, and be careful with the mesh that is underneath;
if it adheres to the bone, gently scratch the bone, for one scratches well without harm, and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not penetrate just to the mesh, and the bone is cut just above, and it has small pieces, then it is necessary to render that asperity, and to remove the scales with the subtle rasp that you must have in various quantities, to apply to each place the most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Start with coarse rasps, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you make adjustments according to their requirement;
and it is a thing that is not denied to one who has placed his study in this art.
And if the wound is deep, then it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen, according to the size of the wound, and anoint it with rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and anoint it with wine and rose oil, and put it on the first dressing; and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not hurt the wound, then apply another linen on top, and do not constrict it more than necessary to hold the wound in place;
and let it be thus for one or two days, until the aposteme, that is to say the abscess, is appeased, then undo it, and apply medicines such as roots of lily, and powder of vetches, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things;
and make powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer at once medicines without mordification;
and beware that the wound becomes immediately clean, so you do not leave in it any foreign object, nor allow it to gather pus, for when pus gathers on the fabric of the brain, it corrodes and festers, and brings great evil to the patient;
for when one puts on the wound a caustic thing, it becomes worse by above. Take heed then, that no evil accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if no fever comes from the medicine that one has put on, which has virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue a drag, and put it on the wound; then for the treatment of manners of treatments that are suitable, as long as he is healthy.
It is known that sometimes both parts of the knee are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones;
and this cartilage is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it becomes inflamed or twisted, and then becomes diseased.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you apply your small bandage or plaster of the knee, and put equal to this fracture inside your bandage, and in the pouch by deficiency, until the knee regains its natural shape; and do it lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the knee, and the joint cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a stick, a little thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, make one part similar to the other, and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess of the swollen tumor is alleviated, then bind to the head of the knee with tendons and bandages of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind one to the other part, where the fracture is; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the openings of the knees.
And say to some restorer that one must moisten the tendons in butter, and move each joint. It does not seem to me that it is good, but rather that they should be moistened with a confection of egg whites and powder of mallow; then let the tendon alone, until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes the swelling bursts out of the abscess, and if the bandage is too tight inside, and it holds the break, and the patient breathes with difficulty; Or do that which you see fit.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are working, then put cotton moistened with rose oil, or in a little hyssop.
And if the abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster made from flour of cypress, and powder of incense, mixed with water, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the nose;
and if the break of the nose is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract the suitable fragments from that, then sew the gash, and treat things that cause pain, swelling, and inflammation, as with plasters and ointments suitable to that;
And if it has no thickness of a new wound, thus the treatment of tendons, and put bandages of plaster, until it is healthy.
When the jawbone is fractured, and there is no open wound, and the breakage is only slight, and it is not broken in two, but rather cracked within, then one must examine it gently.
It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the breakage is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently push the breakage inward, and hold the other side with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
And if the breakage of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you administer extension to the two parts, until they are even.
And if the movements of the teeth are disturbed, or a rupture occurs, then hold them back with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the bruised jaw a kerchief, and put on the double cloak. and put on the cloak a large and well-made star or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it around the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the alignment is changing, then untie it on the third day, and then reset to its proper place what has changed; and apply a plaster on it, made from the powder of a mill with an abundance of egg white or flour of plant, after you have applied the kerchief;
and put on a light plaster, and if the plasters stick, and the condition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healed; Many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if hot abscesses come, then apply what we have said many times.
And if it has a fracture and wound together, reset the naked piece of bone in its place; if subtlety of the bone as extractions provoke convulsions to that.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a flame according to necessity.
And when you have cut all these pieces of bone, and none remain, then sew the wound, if it is large, and put on it some plasters suitable to that, to draw out the pus, until it is healed.
The fracture breaks several times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three manners:
When it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are fragments, and it is more difficult to restore;
or where there is a break with a wound.
And the work is such that when the break is without wound, you should have two attendants, so that one holds the injured area where the force of the break is; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part;
then put the break in its place with your two hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor crookedness.
And if you have the need to stretch further, then put between the shoulder and the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the force, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put the break in its place, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out of the ditch, because it comes from deep within, then it is necessary that the patient put his hand under his armpit, and place the middle of the shoulder on the elbow, and push the lower end of the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then take the breakage with your fingers, and if you pull it true to its debris, then it is necessary that you split on;
and draw the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut it with one of the incisions that you have; but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, to guard the spleen:
and it seems a spoon, and is not too heavy, and should be as large as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound;
and it has two parts, as you see, and one is larger, and the other is narrower, just like the shape of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the shape is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, then moisten the dressing with oil, rose water and vinegar, and apply.
The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you apply to the bone a plaster made from powdered millstone and egg white, and apply light bandages, and put a sponge soaked in vinegar under the bandage, if you have the skill; Then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then put a double cloth on the swelling, and apply the plaster. Then take a thin stick of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the end of the bandage is hanging. and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and undo the healthy shoulder, and undo the diseased shoulder. and reset each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the broken bone, then rewind it every day, and when the ligaments relax, then restrain it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put when he sleeps a small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the joint upwards. If the fracture of the collarbone is reduced by the reduction of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and not untie it unless a bad accident happens, until twenty days;
then put on the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and hold it in place and let it be, until it is restored;
and it is most often restored in twenty-eight days, and in less than eight weeks.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or dislocates when it is not in its middle, and it does not get better unless by touching;
if the bandage conforms to the shape of the fracture, and you rearrange it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
then put on the limb powder of millstone with a little water, and light dressings, and put over it a double cloth; Then put on a broad and subtle plaster, a little broader than the shoulder, and if the plaster is displaced from any part of the shoulder, fill in that place with cotton pads or linen strips, so that the plaster adheres evenly;
and then bind it all with a large bandage firmly, so that the plaster does not move from its place, and examine the patient each day;
and every time it becomes loose, bind it, and put the plaster back in its place, and let the patient lie on their side;
and the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number of days is accomplished, then unbind it, and be careful, for it is not the bone that moves lightly.
And if a piece of bone projects forward, and presses against the heart, then make an incision, and extract it, and do what we have said concerning the treatment of abscesses with hot applications.
of the fracture of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the toe.
And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to the toe, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and coughing, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the bowels in the broken bone, and loses his sense completely.
And the restoration is that the patient puts his back on the ground, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and joins the sides of the two ribs with his hands, and subtly makes an effort to put everything in its proper place, as much as you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then put on plasters and bandages made with a subtle paste of salt, or other light plaster, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it on the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the linen round to the back, and hold it tight, and look at the book every hour, and if it becomes dislocated, then hold it steady;
and if it is necessary to loosen, due to corrosion or itching that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and loosen it, and rub the plaster, and address what has come from various methods of treatments;
then reset the plaster, and hold it steady until it is healed.
of the fracture of the ribs
It is known that the fracture of the ribs does not come from a large blow to the back, and to the inner head, and does not occur except by reason that they are fragile; and let the pain be well for two days.
And the treatment is that you put even the fracture, as it is necessary. And then apply the plaster, and extract a splinter, if you are skilled in this profession.
And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as from a pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits great quantities of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great effort.
And if it is one of those who say that it is necessary to administer foods which inflate the stomach, in order to expel the breakage downward.
We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come, if it is not come from bad blood. And if it has come, then bleed it.
And some say that one puts cupping glasses on the body, to suck out the humor, and this seems reasonable; In every way, doubt exists that the veins do not attract the excesses of the body due to the lack of strength.
And they say that one should cover the body with a warm woolen cloth soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to equalize the flow of liquid around, then be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of diet and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone that breaks the fabric, and doubt exists for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the body of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put instruments in place to protect the lung;
and then one must cut the bone, and gently draw it back, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters, until it is healed.
And if a postulated tumor comes, then put on it a moistened cloth with oil or rosewater, and put it on the affected area;
and treat meanwhile the area of what is necessary for the tumor, and let the dressing be put on the affected place where it should be, as long as it is healthy.
and also to the spine of the back.
And when it happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then take warning if you see their hands made soft and swollen and dead, and they cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when one presses and touches, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the disease will be cured, if one applies a cure.
And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take care to see if the feet are weak, and if the intestines are those that are in the hands, and on the back there is swelling and vomiting without desire.
and when one has it above their stomach, then there is vomiting without desire. And when it is swollen above his back and he wants to sit, then he cannot. Know that they are mortal: then do not labor in their cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, then the thing is more gentle.
And the cure is that you apply if it has a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of muffled wool, as long as it is appeased;
Then put on one of the soothing and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until they are healed.
And if any bone dislocates, then it is necessary to put a strap around the chest; and reduce the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with an ointment of gum, until it is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the elbow", you will put your fist into the palm of your left hand, and place it even with the other hand at your shoulder, then apply the plaster and the stake above, if you have a profession;
Then hold it straight, and if there is a bone out of place, put it back, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
It happens that the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it happens, it does not happen with a little manipulation at the head; and it becomes too long, and declines to the part below, and comes to the patient pain in the leg, and a sharp point, and swells what is broken.
And the restoration is that you put your hand on top, as long as you are above the fracture; and feel what the breakage and its shape are;
and if the breakage is at the head solely, then put equal to that breakage, as long as it is in its natural shape.
And if the break is from the length, or it declines inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach, until the restoration of that break is apparent. And when you have made it even, put on a plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of leather, and hold the break, so that it does not move;
and anoint the limb below the ribs, until the ligament is even. And instruct the patient that they should sleep on their sound side, or on their back.
And if a warm abscess comes, do not touch it, until the warm abscess is appeased, and put on what we have previously mentioned; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it requires, if there is no other bad accident;
of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulders are that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, thus one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
one of which is that you take a wooden stick of moderate thickness, in this shape:
And tie the two sticks to the two sides, and bind them high up, and sit the patient on a seat;
then put the stick with the broken arm on the stick, until it comes to the armpit, and have in the middle a curve of stick, then tie on some heavy thing where the minister's hand stretches downwards;
then put the minister's hands together equal to the break, so that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his shoulder, and ties his hand to his neck, then instructs the servants that one of them touches what is on the fracture with his hands, and the others touch below everything to the ligament, and stretches each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then hold the ligament below the fracture, and on the fracture, and stretch each of the servants to his own part.
And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put one ligament below the armpit, and the other towards the hollow, below the fracture;
and also if the fracture is towards the hollow, then it is necessary to put the ligament lightly, without strain, until the fracture is even on the limb, and on the hollow;
Then put even the fracture, if it is necessary, and hold back, if abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses do come, do not hold back until seven days, and put on a moist plaster with oil of rose, until the abscess is appeased;
then hold back, and the manner of holding back is that you put a plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm with the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the back;
and put on a bandage, and hold to the shoulder, and to the arm, so that the arm is in place of balance, if nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers' width, and let each splint be so large that it goes around the fracture three fingers from each side;
then strain on the stiles, thus as I have said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, stronger and less in aligning.
And if you see the alignment of the stiles, and the straining, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken limb, and you suspect the hot abscess, leave it to heal until the seventh day, as we have said;
then examine each for three days the ligament, that neither swelling nor inflammation comes to the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If it adheres, as we have said.
And if no such accident occurs, then do not force the dislocation further after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, and have their hands on their stomach;
and put a cushion under the shoulder joint evenly, and watch each hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken member does not move, nor the tendons become soft;
if it is treated with the virtue of medicine, and the food is given which we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food should be at first subtle; and when it starts to take hold, then it should be thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken in 40 days of the whole; and then one must dislocate and administer baths and medicines to the joints for the body to be treated.
And if the fracture is ugly and swollen, then it stays dislocated 40 days or 2 months.
of the breakage of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the " radius" and the "ulna", one of which is small, and it is the one that connects to the forearm;
and the other is large, and it is the one that is outward, towards the little elbow;
by chance breaking the large radius alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small radius bone is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, then the healing is difficult, and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
If it is the small radius bone alone that is broken, then it is necessary to stretch it gently, and set it straight.
And if it is the large radius bone, then it is necessary to pull it more strongly;
and extend it onto the cushion, and stretch the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and let the little fingers be lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross themselves on their own body, and the cushion in front of them higher, so that the patient suffers no labor;
then extend the minister's arms to the part below his hand, or to the elbow, and one of the other ministers to the other above.
And then put the mire equal, according to its natural form.
And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is none displaced that touches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a poultice on the bone, as we have said before.
And if it breaks with a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; If you take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses, apply a plaster made from oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and apply the plaster subtly on top, until the abscesses are soothed.
And then remove the wax, and put on a plaster made from powdered millet with some egg, then put on the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be stronger, and a little larger than the others;
and know that it must have six splints or arms in several positions: let the fracture be in one of the bones, or in two;
and hold more firmly on the fracture than other parts, and less tightly when approaching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the scar tissues that are on the bruised area be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and let the scar tissues that are on the bruised area be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And bind the member and the vein after a few hours. And if some bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you rub the member with warm water, until that itching is appeased;
and let the member not be restrained from resting.
And then resume the tightening, and if the veins are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, apply a remedy.
And if the nourishments cannot come to the member, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it thus for a few hours, until the nourishment runs, and then tighten.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not untie them for up to twenty days.
Or put it thus: then he puts his hands at his neck, and let his necks be even, and beware of movement and of degeneration, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have said before, there are few fractures, and it does not come more than a flow of blood many times.
And when the palm of the hand is fractured or pierced, then it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit straight in front of him evenly;
Then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the mangled bones, and puts the nerves in their place, as long as they are well joined;
and applies a plaster and a poultice, if an abscess does not come, then he puts in a probe according to the quantity of the humor; and let it be enveloped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is on the inner side of the belly of the foot, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken foot; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the probe be of wood as soft as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as is necessary.
And if the fracture is in the fingers, it is necessary that you put a probe on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is closed and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and tighten the cloth between the two.
And if a fracture comes to one of the two bones, it is the pulse, set it even, as it is necessary; and strain with the sole of the foot, and if you see that a small straight stick is put in place to lift the fracture, and does not move;
and if the fracture is in one of the other bones, such as in the elbow or one of the others, set it even, and bind it with the healthy bone that is nearby; or you bind them together in a bandage, which is of use, or you put on a stick, like a poultice;
and take care in the restoration and in the treatment of hot abscesses, and heal what comes to it, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often fractured, and one can see it well when it turns to the front and back;
and the restoration is thus on one side of the fracture, and the other below. And the patient puts his hands on his face, then each assistant extends his hand to his side equally;
and it is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then let one of the assistants be at the groin, and the other assistant below the fracture.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the assistant be at the knee, and let the extension be below;
then put the doctor's bones evenly by his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, then let it cool down, then return to your work and to its treatment; The ligature is made in a similar way.
It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a bandage doubled two or three times, and in addition the superfluous, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the hip, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come out above.
Then turn around the leg and the thigh the bandage, then put on the fracture these, and put a steel rod against the bone of the leg;
Then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make equal pressure, then begin to tie firmly two or three turns around the fracture; and the more you go up from the fracture, the less it is tightened;
Then understand the two heads of the thread that you have passed between the thigh and the hip, and in place III these which are dislocated, then return to the dislocation at the head of the thread, until you come down to the foot;
and hold it steady, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess nor swelling nor any similar thing comes to it. And if it happens, then loosen it, and treat what comes from it, as we have said many times;
and if it has pieces of bone that are pricked, then reset them in their place, if one can; and if one cannot, then reset by cutting the place, and pulling strongly; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the hip is broken thus when one puts these, as in the shoulder or the arm;
In every way, during the restoration, do not conceal from the patient.
And be aware that the hip is restored in the joint, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complications.
Be aware that in the hollow of the knee there is little breaking, but it often swells.
And if it breaks, it is no more than a fissure, or a perforation, and has a wound, and without a wound, and that feels well.
And the restoration is when one puts back what is broken in its place, as long as it is assembled with what can be put together;
then apply the plaster, and put on a round splint, if you are skilled in it, and hold it as is necessary, then consider all the treatments that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscesses, heat, and similar things; Put to each accident what is suitable for it, as long as it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Be aware that in the leg there are II bones, one of which is called by right "tibia", and the other is called "fibula";
and it has the same kind of fracture as the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg becomes crooked on every side.
And if the slender bone is broken, it becomes deformed at the front.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it affects the foot; and becomes misshapen.
Then we apply extension, and put it in place, and lay the splints equally;
but however, it is necessary to break it if the wound is bad, and it has many pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter; and adjust according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of cloth that press the thigh on one side and the other, and are as long as the thigh from the knee to the hip;
then wrap two layers one over the other above and below, and tie it in the middle, and with this binding the thigh will not decline to the right or left, and thus it is good;
and let no one administer a bandage as long as the thigh, made of cloth, and put it on the thigh to prevent movement, and properly apply it in the fracture or where there is a wound;
and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or some other accident; if you treat him until he is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
To the ankle comes no fracture, but to the bones of the foot come sometimes fractures and to the two knees, and it does not happen that they are broken in many different ways.
And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then have the patient put their foot on the ground, as if they were going to fly, and then put your foot on top of theirs, where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their place;
then put a plaster and bandages on, and put two small towels under the belly of the foot, then hold the foot firmly in place, then that you have wrapped the dressings around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the linen bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken, or dislocated.
And if there are some of the fingers broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; Then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then put beneath the foot that table that I spoke of, and hold it firmly;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the table firmly beneath the foot; and let it be standing on the top of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken of them. and treat each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone in the nature of the woman is fractured, if it is made to swell, then it is inclined to the back part, and held from behind;
then fill the bowl with the nature of the patient's poultice, and in it put as much as my fist;
then undress the woman, and lift the back a little by little, and then press the poultice, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the fist;
and when she wants to urinate, remove the poultice, and when she has urinated, put it back on, and do this for seven days or within; If it will restore the fracture, and you see, take a bladder of barley, and tie a thread to the perforation, and put all the bladder in the nostril. then blow into the thread strongly, until the bladder is inflated from within: the nostril will return the fracture;
then it should be filled with cotton, and let it be like that for some hours, until it is healed.
And when the bone that gives the shoulder its shape in a man or woman is fractured, restore it in this way as we have said for the bone of the thigh;
and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who puts their study and effort into it, and understands my book.
For the fracture signifies in several dispositions the right way of restoration: Hear the wounds.
On the rod, when it is broken, take a handful of ivy and bind the rod; then wrap tape around, and let it be for three days or four days, and it will be healed quickly.
of a fracture with a wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed now, so that the healings that we have spoken of bear witness.
And if the wound heals, then anoint with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, if apostems or abscesses do not come.
And if apostems or abscesses do come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the apostems are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you would cause a bad accident to come.
And if the broken bone is visible on the heart without covering, then you must put it in place lightly with your hands, for a small extension.
And if the extension is not prepared to put it in your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has 7 or 8 fingers in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the master to take 3 or 4, according to what he needs for each treatment of a fracture;
and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member during your work, and let it be pointed at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head is placed on the top of the visible bone; and strike it once, as long as it regrows, and let one be even with the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the bandages cannot hold the bone well, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, so that the bandage has possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then cut it with an instrument suitable for that, either an incision or a saw, to your power;
then remove what remains in the bone of splinters and small shards.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not yet in its natural place.
Make so that it stays in its place, then moisten the dressing with black styptic wine, and properly if it is in a splint. and do not put on the wound cerote or anything else where it has oil, so that it does not cause suppuration and corruption;
then administer these once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it all around, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted with the dressing;
and many times foolish physicians have done this, and have caused death or corruption to come upon the patient; and let the dressing be softer and more gentle than other dressings.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that an evil accident will occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the body, then it is not necessary to apply these; but wrap around, on the body of the dressings, a piece of cloth, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days a swelling around the wound, remove what you had applied on top of everything, and put on a healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is swollen and sore.
And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the swelling falls away gently.
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but instead discharges pus, with small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with a probe, and remove all those loose pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula appears on the limb, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is said in its chapter previously.
And when the bone is broken, and it opens onto the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or of the shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it immediately, because many times death comes, but let it be until it purifies;
by chance it will close after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound, if you can;
and if you cannot, then leave it be.
Many times they come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the shape of the limb; and by chance it cannot make the limbs perform their natural functions.
Take care then that the nose is not cold: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and other similar things, then that you prepare one of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with a bath of warm water or with vinegar; and put them on a nut in a pestle, and constrain it well, and do not dislodge it with the hand for a long time;
and put them on a nut in a pestle, and constrain it well, and do not dislodge it with the hand for a long time; and then dislodge it, and start again another one, until the swelling of the knot is reduced;
or you constrain on a well-made piece of splint; for the property of splints is that they reduce all the swellings above the limbs;
and if the swelling is already converted into hardness like stone, and it needs to be cut, then they cut above it, and make the excess flesh apparent; or you raise it with a razor, until it is reduced, and the treatment until it is healed.
of the member which is weak after the healing
When the breaking of the bone is restored, and it remains after the member is weak and subtle, then it happens for many reasons: Because one of them is for this reason tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because it had too many ties, and the nourishments could not reach the limb; or because of a multitude of irritations; or because of too great movements, not in their proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
And the cure is that you should make the patient eat, and make the body tender, until the blood is multiplied in it; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness;
then apply poultice to the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the irritation of the skin is often soothed, until the nourishment flows to the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
the limb twists after the injury When the limbs are twisted after the restoration, and the broken bones are exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not retain its natural function:
if you do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
and these practices are blamed, and great evils come from them, and death often results;
however, if the nodules and the hardness are recent, then it is necessary that they be treated with warm water, or that softening herbs be applied, such as leaves of violets, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and make a softening plaster, such as well-made diacalons, and take the muscle of violet, and mix it with fat of goose or oil of cypress, and apply the plaster;
You take fat figs, and you crush them with a little fenugreek, and similar medicines that ease the swelling.
And sometimes the node is soothed by continuously and lengthily rubbing it with a moist hand. And let the movement be eased on the member every hour.
And if the tortuosity is inflamed and hardened, like stone, and needs to be worked with iron, then it must be bored into just to the bone, and subtly and lightly incised; and put caution and study into the cure.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is necessary now to bring back into alignment.
For if one is late, the limbs become inflamed, and by chance, if it resets by itself to the limb;
because it is not suitable to move it to the hole where it is inflamed: many times it causes spasms and other pains;
in any case, when this happens, if you make the patient sane, then leave him, until the abscesses or ulcers are appeased;
then raise the member from the cold and oily water, then reset it gently, and treat each member as its cure will come into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations from the head to the feet.
It happens that the jawbones are dislocated and loose, and the dislocation of both is in two manners: where they are a little loosened from their places, and made a little soft; where they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the pis, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot be held, nor can the mouth be closed, and envelops the tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through many different positions.
And if it is entire and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not delay;
and in such a manner that the minister guides the head of the patient, and puts his fingers in the pouch of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on the lower part; and the other two fingers of the hands are held apart, in order to set it straight;
and instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them from all sides. And look at the step that it returns to its place.
And if the reset is difficult, likewise if it is the two jaws together, apply warm water and oil, until they are reset lightly;
nor do we speak of resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then put on dressings moistened with a mixture made of oil, honey, and wax, and bind them lightly with soft bandages;
and let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be placed between two pillows, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, nor exert themselves to chew, but take light food, until the pains are diminished, and the jaws are numb;
and then chew what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and sound.
And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not converted to their proper position, then come fever and accustomed sweats, and by chance a discharge of stomach, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a prediction; and many times he whom it has befallen dies in eight days.
The fracture cannot dissolve the bone within the continuity of the body and the fat, and is dissolved sometimes in the intestine, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient puts his arm under his back, and stretches out his arms; and then press the shoulder forcefully with your palm, and it will return;
then put on the plaster and bind it tight, and hold in place;
and the part that is turned towards the hip cannot become dislocated; if it does not, and if it becomes dislocated again, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the plaster and bind it tight, and hold in place, and instruct the patient to rest as long as he is healthy;
and similarly the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
one of which is when it becomes dislocated at the lower part of the joint; and the second one is at the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and does not dislocate within for the kidneys;
and often dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially to those who have little flesh, for to these the joint slips out quickly;
to those who have enough flesh, it slips with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And by chance there is to some men a blow or fracture, and the shoulder is swollen from a hot abscess, and it is thought that it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you test it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation when it is downwards towards the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the bone touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an elbow; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his shoulders, nor move with any movements;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touching;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is recent, or if the patient himself is not malformed.
And the method is that the ministers lift the patient's hand up high, then put their fingers below the bone, and lift the joint forcefully up to its place; and the minister lifts the hand and stretches it upwards, then puts it back in place; if it comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in lesser hours afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and let the enema be made softening and soothing, such as a decoction of liquorice and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be administered;
then let the patient be rubbed on their back, and put under the armpit a piece of linen cloth equal, not too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the piece of cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the patient;
and another attendant holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; that shoulder returns now to its proper place, and you will see if it is reset in this manner:
and it is that you make someone who is bigger than the patient be present at home; and let it be straight towards the side of the sick person, and put the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then hang with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And one resets it in another manner:
and it is that you stick a stick into the ground, of which the head is as thick as the wrist, and is neither too big nor too thin; then let it be placed under the patient, but so that he has his shoulders draped up, and the patient is standing from the length of the stick;
then his hand should be extended downwards from the other side of the shoulder, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: Take the size of 4 fingers in width and 3 fingers in length, which has its head bent to enter into the hollow of the armpit, according to this shape:
then tie around the head of the fist a soft cloth, so that the fist does not harm the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient;
and extend his arm on the fist of the long one, and tie the shoulder to the fist, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on a stick of a chair of the width, and let the hands be extended downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: The joint returns to its place now.
And when it is in place, in whatever manner that may be, then you must put under the shoulder a layer of wool equal, then put the plaster prepared with powder of millstone, and incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around, then strain under the shoulder firmly, and turn the linen on the plaster, and hold the hand to his neck, and let the other hand remain in place.
And it is necessary that he moves little, so that the limbs are comforted, for the blood will be more stable;
and then move more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is hardened and does not become softened, then it will be healthy.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations to three places, as it is stated beforehand in this chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all that, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be firmly fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is of the chest and the shoulders, or back, if it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another ointment;
and cures until it is healed.
And if after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowness in movement, then let the patient bathe many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the thigh
know that the joint of the thigh is dislocated at the points, and at the points it returns;
and it is dislocated on all sides, and likewise in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back in place, for one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the sick joint with the sound one, if you can see it openly. For the joint is injured, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscesses in the vicinity heal, for if the abscesses in the vicinity came, it would be grievous to reset;
and by chance it cannot be reset completely, likewise when it is behind; if it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is thus, when it is such that one can restore it, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and his arms should be expanded, and the hands placed according to the shape of the thorax, inward and outward, and the joint bent towards his chest together, or at the root of his palm, until it regains its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand onto his hand, and strikes from the root of the palm the joint that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it, so that it does not move during extension;
then turn the arm from each side, after you have enveloped it with a double layer of cloth, long and wide;
and when the doctor anoints the joint with oil to soften the joint, then wraps the joint firmly, until it regains strength;
and when it is in place, then put on a dry plaster with wool and bind firmly, and tie the arm to the patient's neck, and leave it for some hours, then untie it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then untie the bandage, and leave it;
and if you see that the joint does not bind well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some hours, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
And if he feels grittiness after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe it and rub thoroughly, and press until it is soothed; You put on the joint a poultice of fatty wool, then let it be for a day and a night, then remove it, and make them enter into a bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the poultice on again, and then enter into a bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healed;
and if you see fit, put on a bandage of warm moist cloth with butter, and bind it on;
if it returns to its proper place.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its displacement is slight, more than the other joints. However, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limbs are not weakened, or that an abscess does not form.
And the remedy is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the healthy hand, and look at the hand evenly, so that it puts its palm on the surface of the joint, and bends it until it returns.
In any case, it is necessary that you check if it is in its proper place; Then put the sick hand's back on a table for extension and resetting. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the sick back of the hand on the table, and look to put the hand on the same surface of the joint.
If it returns now, it's good. If not, then strain the bandages tightly around abscesses and ulcers, and leave them thus without removing.
And if it cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some hours, the joint remains twisted;
and does not help the patient much unless the swelling goes down, and he cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
if there is no other remedy besides cauterizing the case, and by chance there is nothing else of value.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then bind it and let it be for 5 hours, then unbind it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, apply warm water, and rub it until it is sound.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the joint of the hand is dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly;
then stretch the joint and push the dislocation to your pouches as far as it will go, then hold the head of the joint, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and let it be two hours, and then put it even with that hour;
and anoint the joint, as we have said, and the dislocation of the joint, and make it move, and relieve the joint;
and do this often, until it is straight, and also do this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy;
and also do this, when it is dislocated in another area.
Drop the dislocation of the shoulder bone from the back
When the shoulder bone of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are multiple dislocations, if there is no point of treatment, for death hastens the patient.
And the symptoms are that the evacuations come out with voluntary force, cannot be held, and often some member is softened, either the two hips or the two arms or one.
And often the shoulder moves to four parts;
that which moves in the back is called "gilbositez":
the treatment is that you should rewind where the gilbositez comes from childhood: if there is no point of cure or healing of all.
And the one that comes from a fall or from blows or similar things, the ancient manners of cures say with grand words, where there is not much profit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the chest before, neither engineer nor wise man;
and also the one that comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure the ones outside of the one that properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in a level place, and have their spine straightened, so they do not bend;
then fix one claw at the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a string around the shoulders of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two men hold the strings, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two claws;
and are well strengthened, the tendons as we have said, and the muscles put their palms on the spine strongly, until it regains strength.
And if it does not regain strength through this treatment, take a table three handbreadths long, and shave the area around the spine, and let the patient be in a comfortable position, and put the end of the table under the spine, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and put the surgeon's feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly, until it regains its place;
and if you see that it is dislocated, make it right for the one who turns with the hand. And it is that you fix two tendons at the head of the patient's arm from above, and two others at the feet, and have between each tendon, above and below, a palm's length of space;
and it has in each season a pierced or a turned horn, or the horn is firmly fixed in the ground, so that it does not move;
and between two seasons it has a turning horn, because of which the horns turn, and it has in two turns two small seasons of a palm's length, to turn the horn;
and then the ligament that is between the bones at the joint towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other joint, and each of the ministers turns its turn to all the ligament, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
And when it is straight, then put on a plaster made with vinegar and egg, and then the poultices, and then the stake of a tablet three fingers in length, which should cover the joint of the gibbosity and the part of the spine, then bind with a ligament, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment, until they are healthy;
and if anything happens at the end of the health, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the steel that we mentioned earlier; and sometimes we administer a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear spinal column of the back, and we think that it is a dislocation; and it's the bone that breaks, for which one should not have a false assumption: by chance or accident death may come.
It is known that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out in dislocations, nor do they come out like the other joints;
and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four parts: downward and upward, and forward and backward;
and thicker behind than in front.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick thigh with the sound one, it is longer, and opens the patient's knee more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the ground; and the place that is next to the hot abscess becomes inflamed, because the head of the thigh-bone comes there.
And the sign of one who has a defect in the hip is that these accidents are opposite to those in front.
And the signs of one who has a problem in the front are that their thigh is out of alignment according to the condition; In every way, the knee does not bend without pain, and if one tries to make it move, it cannot go forward, and retains its urine, and the groin becomes inflamed, and when one walks, it passes onto the heel.
And the signs of the one who has a dislocation in the back are that he cannot stretch his knee, nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is out of place beneath the ribs.
The reminder of this type of dislocation is that you should consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, if there is no suitable cure; and it is not necessary that he has a fracture.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the four manners of dislocation, you should hasten to turn the joint, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply a strong minister, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee; and one other minister extends his hand from above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then tightens with a soft thread on the thigh; and another holds the head of the thread;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of stretching is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has recurred, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it is necessary to apply treatment to its similarity.
When the dislocation is in the buttocks, then you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the thigh, and the limb which is under the hip, then stretch the thread upwards towards the hip, and towards the strength;
Then take another minister with his arms, and embrace the large limb of the hip of the patient, and stretch it in the opposite direction firmly: if it returns to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is easier than the others.
And if you cannot fasten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage under the two heels, and under the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
then let it hang from the head of a pole, and let it be two arms length above the ground;
then instruct a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be hanging with the patient, who strongly embraces the hip, for the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is in the thigh, instruct the patient thus, as we have said regarding one who has a fracture, and stretch the tendon above the sick thigh properly, and above the foot also;
then put two splints, one at the head and the other at the feet, then fix the splint between the thighs to the patient in the middle of the form; and have moist cloths applied around it, so that they do not touch the patient, then extend each hand towards him, and let the physicians put their hands equally on the dislocation.
If it returns, it's good.
If not, put on a wooden table, and press thus as we have said regarding the fracture, and instruct the patient to rest on the injured side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick thigh immediately, and according to what I have said; And put his right hand on the patient's shoulder, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the thigh, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downward, nor lift from the ground, but rather that it should be as if the hip was dislocated upward, as we have said concerning lying on the two hips; and let it be on its face, and the limb stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint with the fist; and it will be at an end when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be even; then join the thighs, and apply a plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest three or four days, then undo it, and put the plaster on again;
and if you see that they are even, then hold them back, as before, and let them be for three days;
then unbind it, and make it walk gently, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee joint
The knees are dislocated in three ways: namely, inward, outward, and backward;
and not dislocated at all to the front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not adhere to his thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take your knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee to form; and another minister stretches his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it has well its leg at his thigh lightly;
and put the plaster on, and make adhere the leg to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then undo it;
and do not exert the patient to get up, until the limbs are comforted.
And if the limbs are not in place, administer strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is healed;
of the dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are sometimes numb, and sometimes completely dislocated, and within and without.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it is pulled forward to the part where it is dislocated:
The relocation is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it has only slightly slipped.
And when it is dislocated to a great extent, then you must have the patient sit straight, and pull the bone forcibly back by the leg, above the ankle;
then take the foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and gently bend the foot upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, bending and pulling the foot;
if it returns to its place, that's good;
If not, then resume the treatment, for it will return;
and if it cannot return by itself, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and fix the ankle firmly to the ground between their legs, and tie the blankets around, so that the patient does not move;
Then let the servants support the crotch, and another servant stretches the foot to his hands or to the knee, so that he lies on the neck of the foot; Then each servant holds equally, and the poles are always between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when they stretch it;
Then put the mire equally to the dislocation with his hands, and another servant holds the healthy thigh below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, put the plaster and stop up above, and tighten firmly, and tie the foot to the thigh, and beware of the nerves that are behind the knee, so that the ligaments are not too tight;
Then let it be for two days or three, and if the ligaments become soft, then tighten;
Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and have the patient apply it for four days; and if it goes beyond this limit, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if a posthernia or a boil comes, then you must treat it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
of the back When the back is dislocated, then it is necessary to extend it gently without effort, and it is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the vertebrae of the back or foot, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table with their back straight, and put your foot on what separates these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it snaps back into place;
and when it is even, and there is no separation, then put under the sole of the foot a board between two sticks, then bind firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and have it rest, as long as it is healthy.
of wounds and of dislocations together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not piteous and merciful and slow, not hasty;
and apply at the beginning of things that bring about a hot abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset now the limb in its place, so that the hot abscesses may come to life;
and when the limbs are in place, then administer things that bring about hot abscesses, and treat the wound, as it requires, with dry dressings;
and with the dislocation of a fracture, and bones are out of joint, if they are broken, and do what we have said for simple illnesses;
and guard yourself from entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worthy to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and of your body.
