AFTER finishing for you, my sons, this book which is the part of knowledge dealing with medicine in its entirety; and having made it as clear and explicit as possible, I thought it well to complete it for you by adding this treatise which concerns surgical operating.
For the skilled practitioner of operative surgery is totally lacking in our land and time; so that the knowledge of it is on the point of being blotted out and its remains lost; and there is nothing left of it except a few traces in the books of the Ancients; where, however, it has been so corrupted by the hands of scribes, and subjected to error and confusion, that its meaning has become obscured and its value diminished.
Therefore I decided to revive this art by expounding, elucidating, and epitomizing it in this treatise; and to present the forms of the cauterizing irons and other operative instruments, since this is an adjunct to explanation and a vital necessity.
Now this is the reason why there is no skilful operator in our day: the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its exponent, before he exercises it, to be trained in anatomy as Galen has described it, so that he may be fully acquainted with the uses, forms, and temperament of the limbs; also how they are jointed, and how they may be separated; that he should understand fully also the bones, tendons, and muscles, their numbers and their attachments; and also the bloodvessels, both arteries and veins, with their relations.
And so Hippocrates said: 'Though many are doctors in name, few are in reality, particularly on the surgical side.'
We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book. For he who is not skilled in as much anatomy as we have mentioned is bound to fall into error that is destructive of life. Thus I have seen many laying claim to this knowledge and boasting of it, but having neither knowledge nor experience.
I saw an ignorant doctor incise a scrofulous tumour in a woman's neck; and he cut certain arteries in the neck so that the woman bled until she fell dead before him.
And I saw another doctor presume to take out a stone from a man of advanced age. The stone was large; he rushed blindly at the task and extracted the stone and with it a piece of the bladder itself; and the man was dead in about three days.
I had myself been previously called in to extract the stone but from what I saw of the size of it and the condition of the patient I judged that the outcome would be so.
I saw another doctor who had a regular salary from one of the high officers of our country for medical treatment. There had occurred to a negro boy of his a fracture of the leg near the heel, together with a wound; the doctor rushed in, in his ignorance, and bound up the fracture, over the wound, very tightly, with pads and splints, not allowing the wound to breathe.
He then let him go as he wished and then dismissed him for some days bidding him not to loose the bandage. Eventually his leg and foot swelled and he was close to death.
I was called in and made haste to loose the bandage, upon which some ease and reduction of the pain followed.
Nevertheless, gangrene had already taken hold on the limb and I could not hinder its progress; it. continued to extend in the limb until he perished.
And I saw another doctor incise a malignant tumour; after some days the place broke out in open ulceration, thereby adding to the misery of the patient.
For a cancer that arises from a melancholic humour should never be touched by the knife unless it should happen to be in a part of the body which may be removed thoroughly and in its entirety.
Wherefore you must know, my sons, that operative surgery is divided into two parts, namely, where operation is associated with the health of the patient, and, on the other hand, where it is for the most part fraught with danger.
Throughout the following book I point out wherever I have described an operation that is accompanied by fear and danger. It behoves you to be wary and to shun such, lest the ignorant have an opportunity to reproach and slander you.
Show, then, caution and care for yourselves and gentleness and perseverance for your patients.
Take the best road that leads to health and a happy outcome. Illnesses that are very threatening or difficult to cure, leave alone. Purify yourselves of anything which you fear may cause doubt as to your religious life and your secular life; for this will perpetuate your good name and will elevate your fortunes in this world and the next.
For Galen once said in certain of his admonitions: 'Do not treat mischievous maladies lest you get the name of mischievous doctors.'
I have divided this treatise into three books:
BOOK ONE. Concerning the actual cautery; and cauterization by caustics. It is divided into chapters set in order from the head to the feet. The shapes of the instruments are shown and the iron cauteries and all things necessary for operating.
BOOK TWO. Concerning incision and perforation; blood-letting and cupping; wounds and the extraction of arrows and the like. The whole is divided into chapters in order; and illustrations of instruments are given.
BOOK THREE. Concerning the setting of bones; dislocations; the treatment of sprains and the like. This is similarly divided into chapters set in order from head to feet, with illustrations of instruments.
Before we expatiate on the actual operation of cautery it is necessary to mention its advantages and disadvantages and the temperament upon which it is to be used.
I say that a discourse on the advantage and disadvantage of cautery is a long one, a subtle learning, a hidden secret. A great number of wise men have spoken on the subject with differing opinions. Lest I should be over long I have reduced their opinions to a summary.
Now I say that the cautery has universal application for every ill constitution, whether organic or functional, with the exception of two: the functional hot temperament and the functional dry temperament.
About the organic dry temperament the Ancients differed, some saying that cautery helps in a constitution of this kind, while others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use in a disease caused by heat or dryness; for fire is naturally hot and dry and it is obviously absurd to treat a hot dry sickness with a hot dry remedy.
But he who holds the opposite view says that actual cautery may help in the case of such hot dry illnesses as arise in the human body; for when you compare the human body, humid as it is, with the nature of fire you find the human body cold.
I myself from much experience agree with this last opinion.
However, no one should attempt this operation unless he has had long training and practice in the use of the cautery, and is fully acquainted with the various human temperaments, and the character of the complaints in themselves; their causes, symptoms, and duration.
Concerning the rest of the temperaments there is no reason for fear, particularly the cold and humid distempers; all medical men are agreed and none differs concerning the utility of the cautery in such cases.
Now you should know, my sons, that the actual cautery and its superiority over cauterization with chemical caustics is one of the secrets of medicine. For fire is a simple substance having no action except upon the actual part cauterized; nor does it do more than slightly harm any adjacent part.
But the effect of cauterization with caustic may spread to parts at a distance from that burnt; and also in the part cauterized it may give rise to a disease difficult to cure or even fatal.
Whereas fire, on the other hand, on account of the nobility of its nature and its superiority has no such effect unless it is overdone. That has become clear to us by experience through length of service, devotion to the art, and acquaintance with the facts of the matter. So I need not prolong this discourse. Were it not inappropriate to this my book I should relate to you a deep secret concerning fire, the manner of its action on bodies and its expulsion of diseases; with a reasoned philosophical discourse too subtle for your understanding.
Know also, my sons, that the Ancients disagreed also as to the fit time for cautery, affirming that spring was the best.
Myself, I say that the cautery is suitable at all times; for whatever harm may arise from the season of the operation is utterly outdone by the benefit deriving from the cauterization itself; especially if the cautery is applied to pains that are severe, grievous, and swift, brooking no delay, because of the fear that the consequences may be more grave than the slight harm from the season.
Nor let enter your minds, my sons, the groundless notion of the laity and of ignorant doctors, that the complaint cured by the cautery never comes back later; do not cleave to this opinion.
The fact is not as they think; for the cautery is homologous to the drug which alters the constitution and dries up the humidities that give rise to disorders.
But the cautery excels the drug by the rapidity of its success, the strength of its action, and the potency of its powers.
It may be that the disease will return at some time according to the temperament of the patient, and the persistence and virulence of the disease; and from the formation of a mass of superfluities in the body; from his neglect of himself in acquiring them from food; and from causes of a similar nature. Of course, if the disease to which the cautery is applied be a slight one, and in a part only slightly liable to superfluities and humidities, as, for example, the cauterization of a molar tooth for toothache, and the like, then it may happen that the pain does not return; but that happens rarely.
Another common saying is that the cautery is the final remedy; which is true, but not in the way which they mean. For they believe that after cauterization no treatment, either with or without medicine, will help.
It means something precisely the opposite: after various treatments have been applied to a certain disorder without success, then last of all we apply cauterization and this proves effective; whence comes about the saying that the cautery is the final remedy—not in that sense in which it is popularly held by the laity and by many ignorant medical men.
The Ancients have stated that cauterization by gold is more effective than by iron. Now they said that on account of the temperateness of gold and its noble character.
They also stated that the site of cauterization does not become purulent, but that is not absolutely so; for I myself have experience of that and have found that it happens in some cases and not in other cases. Cauterization by gold is indeed better and more successful than with iron, as they have stated; except that when you are heating the gold cautery in the fire you are uncertain, by reason of the redness of the gold, when it reaches the desired temperature. In addition to this it cools very quickly; and if you overheat it it melts in the fire, melts and runs, and the practitioner finds himself in difficulties.
Therefore in our own opinion cauterization is swifter and more successful with iron.
Now I have arranged this book on cauterization by chapters, set in order from the head to the foot, to make it easy for the seeker to find what he wants.
CHAPTER ONE.
This cauterization helps against excessive humidity and coldness on the brain, which cause headache, abundance of defluxions from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, excess of sleep, toothache, sore throat, and in general any sort of disorder arising from frigidity, such as palsy, fits, apoplexy, and diseases similar to these.
The manner of performing this operation is first to bid the patient open the bowels with an evacuant which will also clear his head, for three or four nights, according to the strength, age, and habits of the patient.
Then tell him to have his head shaved; then seat him cross-legged before you, with his hands on his breast.
Then place the lower part of your palm upon the root of his nose between his eyes; and where your middle finger reaches mark that place with ink. Then heat an olivary cautery.
Then bring it down upon the marked place with one downward stroke with gentle pressure, revolving the cautery; then quickly take your hand away while observing the place.
If you see that some bone is exposed, the size of the head of a skewer or a grain of vetch, then take your hand away; otherwise repeat with the same iron, or, if that has got cold, with another, till the amount of bone I have mentioned is exposed.
Then take a little salt dissolved in water; soak some cotton in it, apply to the place and leave for three days.
Then apply some cotton soaked in butter and leave it on till the eschar falls off; then dress with Tetrapharmacum ointment till healed.
The Ancients said that the more a wound is kept open, discharging pus, the better and more efficacious.
Some said the skin was to be cauterized through to the bone and the cautery held until some of the thickness of the bone was burnt.
Then the burnt bone was to be scraped out, then dressed.
Others said that the cautery should be carried through to burn a deep impression in the bone so that there should come out of the bone a piece shaped like a grain of a carob tree or a small spindle-whorl; they asserted that the vapours of the head would be exhaled through this place.
The wound should be kept open a long while, then dressed until healed.
But these two methods of cauterization I do not consider right except on certain men; and I regard them as risky. In my opinion, to let the patient alone is preferable and safer, if it is to be. For the head is weakened when its natural continuity is broken, as we see in other parts, and particularly when the patient's head is weak by nature.
In my opinion the first type of cauterization is safer and better; therefore use that and be safe.
CHAPTER TWO.
On cauterization of the head (continued).
When the whole head is affected by chronic headache which has for long vexed the patient, and electuaries, laxatives, errhines, oils, and plasters have been applied; and particularly if he has undergone the single cauterization which we have described, all with no effect, then look well, and if his head is naturally strong of structure and is not weak, and if he feels a vehement frigidity, cauterize him over again a little above the first cautery; then cauterize him on each frontal prominence with one cautery so as to remove the thickness of the skin and expose as much of the bone as we have mentioned above; and burn him with one stroke on the hinder part of the head in the place known as the occiput; but in this cauterization be gentle and do not lay bare the bone; for thus the patient would have intense pain, different from that of other head cauterizations.
I shall describe this cauterization in its own place. The cautery for the frontal prominences and occiput must be more slender than that for the middle part.
CHAPTER THREE.
On the cauterization of non-chronic migraine.
When there occurs pain with headache in one side of the head and the pain extends to the eye; and the patient has cleared his head with purging drugs and there has been applied the other treatment that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases, but to no avail; in this disorder cauterization is of two sorts, either with caustic or with the actual cautery.
This is the manner of cauterization with caustic: take one clove of garlic; peel it and cut both ends off; then cut open the site of the pain in the temple with a broad scalpel till there is room to contain the clove under the skin; then introduce it under the skin till it lies completely hidden.
Then bind up the wound tightly over it with pads and leave for fifteen hours; then unbind it, remove the garlic, and leave the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till it suppurates.
Then dress with ointment till it heals.
If you would rather, you may carry it out with one of the caustic drugs that I have included in the eighteenth treatise, on caustics.
The actual cauterization with iron should be done in this way: heat a cautery of this shape.
It is called the claviform; the head is nailshaped in that there is a slight curvature with a small protuberance in the middle.
Apply it then to the site of the pain, hold your hand steady and revolve it little by little.
Let the thickness of skin burnt be about half; then remove your hand so as not to burn a subjacent artery, for thus a haemorrhage arises.
Then soak some cotton wool in saline, apply to the place, and leave three days; then apply cotton wool with butter; then treat with ointment till it heals.
Or if you prefer you can cauterize this migraine with the knife-edge that juts out from the cautery; but be careful not to cut an artery, specially in this kind of migraine that is non-chronic.
CHAPTER FOUR.
On the cauterization of chronic migraine.
When you have treated a migraine in the way we have described and with what we have mentioned in the sections on diseases, and the treatment is ineffective, and you perceive that the malady is such that the cauterization we have mentioned before does not suffice for it, either with caustic or with the actual cautery, you should heat an edged cautery to white heat after you have marked the place with a line half a finger's breadth long or thereabouts; and impress your hand once and maintain the pressure till you cut down upon the artery and reach the bone.
You must be careful of the mandibular joint which moves in chewing, that you do not cut the muscle or tendon that moves it, causing spasm.
Have the utmost care of haemorrhage from the artery you have cut, for the occurrence of that is dangerous, specially with one who does not know what to do, having no experience or practice; it is better to refrain from operating.
We shall later on mention a treatment for accidental haemorrhage of the artery, in due detail, in its proper place in this book.
But if you see that this cautery is not enough for this disorder and you see that the patient is of bodily fitness for it, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound till healed.
If you prefer, employ that cauterization which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery of two blades; for that is a cauterization better and more effective than this.
CHAPTER FIVE.
On cauterization of pain in the ears.
When the ear gets a pain from the cold and is treated with laxatives and other medicine as mentioned in its section and the pain nevertheless persists, heat the cautery termed 'punctate'.
Then after it has been heated prick with it in a circle right round the ear, or around both if there is pain in both, after the place has been marked with ink; the cauterizations being a little away from the ear.
Let the cauterization be of ten punctures or thereabouts round each. Then dress the places till healed.
CHAPTER six.
Cauterization of the twisted mouth.
The twisting of the mouth which is curable with the cautery is of that nature which arises from phlegm, as we have already noticed in the sections on sicknesses.
But cauterization is to be carefully avoided in that type which is due to dryness or spasm of the tendon.
When this kind of deformity has been treated with electuaries, errhines, and gargles, and your treatment is ineffective, you should use three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear; the second a little below the temple; and the third at the junction of the lips.
Let your cauterization be on the opposite side to the affected side, for the relaxation will arise in the side which seems normal.
The form taken by the cauterization is that you burn him a little below the frontal prominence, on a level with the upper tip of the ear, and also on the temple the length of the thumb; carry the burning to a depth of about half the thickness of the skin.
The shape of the cautery. It is a variety of the bladed cautery such as has already been described, but is rather more slender as you see. Its blade should have a certain thickness.
Then dress the place with what we have mentioned till healed.
CHAPTER SEVEN.
On the cauterization of a chronic apoplexy.
When an apoplexy has lasted a long while and has been treated by those methods we have given and your treatment has been ineffective but the patient has no fever, then burn him with four cauterizations: one on each frontal prominence; one in the middle of his head as we have described; and one at the back of the head as has been said.
The shape of the cauteries to be as before. He may also be given one burn over the cardia of the stomach; that will be more efficacious. Then treat as described.
CHAPTER EIGHT.
On cauterization for lethargy due to phlegm.
First, great electuaries should be given to the patient to drink; and pills to clear the head.
Then let his whole head be shaved and apply a mustard plaster to the hinder part as described in the treatise on plasters.
That should be applied several times as it is a kind of cauterization; do it in the very way described there.
If he is cured, well and good; but if not, burn him with three cauterizations on the back of the head, arranging them in a row downward from the upper part of the head to the base of the neck; and make an interval between each pair of one finger's breadth. Then treat as aforesaid.
If you wish to add to these cauterizations and the patient be fit to bear it, give him a burn in the middle; and if still more, then burn him on the two frontal prominences.
Then dress till healed. Let the cautery be an olivary as described before.
CHAPTER NINE.
On cauterization in palsy and flaccidity of the whole body.
Purgation of the head should come first, with electuaries and the other things we have mentioned. Then shave the patient's head; and then burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head and one on either frontal prominence and one on the occiput, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if the malady of flaccidity of the body require still more and the patient be fit to bear it, and his disease be severe and have a strong hold on him, burn him with four more cauterizations on his dorsal vertebrae and carry the cautery to burn almost through the thickness of the skin; then remove your hand and treat him in the aforesaid manner till he is healed. Let the cautery be olivary.
CHAPTER TEN.
On cauterizing for epilepsy.
The epileptic who may be cauterized is he whose epilepsy arises from phlegm.
When the patient is an adult and can stand taking the drugs, he should first purify his brain by great electuaries and the rest of the treatment mentioned in that section.
But if it be a boy unable to tolerate the drugs he should employ gargles and medicaments to chew, to clear his brain, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in his diet.
Then let his head be shaved and burn him with the single cauterization on the middle of the head in the manner described before, and with one cauterization on the occiput, and one on each frontal prominence; and, if the patient be fit and able to bear it, add those additional cauterizations on the cervical and dorsal vertebrae that we have already described for paralysis and for flaccidity.
The cautery should be olivary, the shape before described.
If the patient be a boy, use a fine cautery.
CHAPTER ELEVEN.
On cauterization for melancholy.
When the cause of the melancholy be corrupt humours and a thick phlegm, burn him with those cauterizations mentioned in the case of the paralytic.
If the cause of the melancholy be a redundance of humour turning to black bile, and the patient's body be humid, make him drink that which will purge his head as described in a previous section.
Then shave the patient's head and apply a compact ring-bandage of linen and put it round the middle of his head.
Have him sit cross-legged, held firmly on all sides.
Then take a pound of stale sheep's butter and warm it on the fire to a moderate heat so that a finger put in can bear it; then pour it out on the middle of the head inside the circle of the bandage and leave it till it has cooled.
Do this once a week with other efficacious treatment till he is cured. If you wish, burn him with multiple small puncture cauterizations; nor press long on the cautery but let this cauterization be only just punctured. For this kind of cauterization will moderately moisten the brain.
Then let cotton soaked in butter or hen's grease be applied.
CHAPTER TWELVE.
On cautery in cataract of the eye.
When by those signs I have mentioned in the relevant section there is brought to your notice the beginning of a cataract of the eye, start with draughts for the patient such as shall cleanse his head; and guard him from all humidities.
Make him also sweat for some days, fasting, in the bath.
Then tell him to have his head shaved; and burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head; then cauterize him with two burns on the temples if the cataract is beginning in both eyes; or on the one side only if it is in one eye.
And with the cautery cut all the subcutaneous veins and arteries; and let the cauterizations be long, across the breadth of the temples.
Beware of haemorrhage; if you see any, stanch it straight away with any means you can.
We shall deal later on with the method of extraction and cutting out of arteries, and provision against haemorrhage.
Two strong cauterizations are sometimes made on the back of the neck below the two bones.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN.
On cauterization of persistent lachrymation.
When tears are constantly in the eye and arise on account of the arteries and veins visible on the outside of the head, and you are sure that they are from cold thick phlegmatic superfluities, burn him with the very cautery that I taught for the beginning of cataract, namely, a cauterization in the middle of the head and two on the temples, and two on the back of the neck below the two bones; and, if you are compelled to add more, one cauterization on the side of the outer corner of each eye at the end of the eyebrow, with a small cautery.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN.
On cauterization for foetor of the nose.
When you have treated foetor by those methods given in its section and your treatment is unsuccessful, give the patient laxative draughts for three days; then shave his head; and burn with a median cauterization with the olivary cautery; then cauterize him twice above the eyebrows a little below the hair with a claviform cautery.
Beware of cutting the artery.
The figure of the claviform cautery.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN.
On cauterization for relaxation of the eyelid.
When an eyelid droops either from disease or humidity, then burn the lid with a single cauterization with this crescent-shaped cautery.
And if you wish burn him also a little above the eyebrows with two cauterizations (; that is, one) on each side; but keep clear of the temples; and let each cauterization be of the length of the eyebrow.
Nor let your hand apply the cautery longer than to burn a third of the way through the skin.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN.
On cauterization of the eyelid when the eyelashes are turned inwards, irritating the eye.
The cauterization is of two kinds, by fire and by caustic.
Cauterization by fire will be thus: tell the patient previously, if he is one of those who pluck the lashes, to let them grow till they are long and straight; and if during growth they irritate him, bind the eyes with a fillet so as not to move till they have grown.
When they have grown and are straight, put the patient's head in your lap and mark upon the eyelid with ink the shape of a myrtle leaf, beginning near the lashes.
Then apply cotton wool soaked in egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds.
Then heat a cautery of this form.
Then burn over the shape marked out, slowly, with many small strokes, till the whole surface of the skin marked out to the shape of the myrtle leaf be cauterized, specially the outer part of it.
It will show the correctness of your work if you see the eyelid contracted and the lashes risen away from the white of the eye.
Then remove your hand and let him be for three days. Then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till the scab falls off; then treat the place with ointment till healed.
But if after an interval there be a return of the same condition of the eyelash and of drooping of the eyelid, repeat the cauterization in the same place just as you did before.
And if it be in the lower lid cauterize this also till it falls back to its normal position and the hairs do not irritate the eye.
This is the method of burning with caustic: bid the patient let the lashes grow long and straight; then make the shape of a myrtle leaf out of paper.
Then take of common soap and of quicklime of each the weight of a drachm or thereabouts and beat them well together rapidly lest the mass get cold; then spread this on the paper shaped like a myrtle leaf and apply to the eyelid of one or both eyes; place also under the eye cotton wool soaked in egg-white; the patient's head being in your lap.
Place your forefinger on the caustic and press it down a little and move it about according as the patient feels the bite of the caustic; for he will feel it sting like fire.
While the stinging lasts, let the caustic remain on and move it about with your finger; and when the stinging dies down take away the caustic and wash the eye with water; then look, and if you see the eyelid raised up as by a blepharoplasty, either by fire or by incision, good. If not, repeat the caustic application in the place that the drug has not affected and which has not gone black, until your operation is complete and the eyelid draws together.
Then apply cotton wool with butter till the crust of the burn falls away; then treat with Palm ointment or the like till it be healed.
But in your operative procedure take the utmost care lest the least bit of caustic get into the eye. And if, after some days, the eyelid be relaxed and some eyelash irritate the eye, then repeat the application, particularly in that part of the lid that has dropped, in the same manner as before; and treat till cured.
This is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
You should know that the human eye varies in size; so let your contracture be in proportion to this.
The right procedure is well known to him who has experience in this art.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.
On cauterization of a fistula in the angle of the eye.
When you have treated a fistula in those ways mentioned in the sections on diseases, without success, it should be cauterized after this manner. Bid the patient put his head in your lap; and let an assistant hold his head in front of you without moving or stirring.
Then place on his eyes cotton wool damped with egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds.
Then heat a cautery shaped thus.
It should be hollow and in shape like a fine tube, like an eagle's quill, at the one end that is used as a cautery.
And if you wish it may be perforated to the other extremity; or it can be solid like a probe.
But this hollow instrument will be better for your operation.
Then press on the fistula if it be open and get the matter out of it and wipe it away; or if it is not open, then open it.
Then apply to it the cautery, which should be very hot, and press it in with your hand till it reaches the bone. While you are burning keep the hand away from the eye slightly toward the nasal side, lest your hand slip or the patient draw away so that you put the cautery into the ball of the eye and destroy it.
And if you reach the bone at the first cauterization, good; if not, repeat the cauterization if necessary. Leave it a few days, then put on cotton wool with butter and treat with hygroscopic ointment till it heals.
And should forty days have passed and it does not heal, apply a sharp corrosive ointment so as to expose the bone, and strip it as will be explained in the appropriate chapter.
Another method of cauterizing a fistula is that which some of the Ancients mentioned: apply yourself to the site of the fistula and incise it; then insert into the incision a fine funnel, this being the figure of it, and pour into it a drachm of molten lead; and keep your hand on the funnel, holding it firm all the time, and do not let the patient move at all, lest the molten lead run into his eyes. Then you should put cotton wool soaked in egg-white or water upon the patient's eye.
If the fistula heals by the cauterization and medication we have described, well and good; otherwise perforation of the nose will undoubtedly have to be undertaken to lead the fistula into the meatus of the nose, by the technique that will come in its own place.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.
On cauterization of hare lip.
There often occur fissures in the lip to which are given the name 'hairs'; they are particularly common in the lips of boys.
When you have ineffectually treated these clefts with those things that we have mentioned in their section, then heat a small edged cautery of this shape.
The hollow should be as sharp as a knife.
Then quickly place it, hot, right on the fissure till the burning has reached the depth of the lip.
Then treat with wax plaster till healed.
CHAPTER NINETEEN.
On the cauterization of fistulae occurring in the mouth.
When there comes a tumour in the base of the gums or in the palate or in the roots of the molar teeth, and it becomes purulent and breaks out and a fistula comes from the flow of pus, and you have treated this without effect, you should heat a cautery of a size to fit the fistula; then introduce it hot into the fistula opening; and continue the pressure with it hot until the iron, still hot, reaches the hollow and the extremity of it. Do this once or twice over. Then afterwards treat as we have mentioned until it heals.
If the matter stops and it heals, well and good; otherwise it is impossible to avoid opening up the place and removing the diseased bone in the manner we shall speak of in its proper chapter.
CHAPTER TWENTY.
On cauterization of teeth and of relaxed gums.
When the gums are relaxed on account of humidity and the teeth are loose, and you treat this with drugs, and your treatment is ineffectual, then place the patient's head in your lap; then heat the cautery whose picture will come later. Put a cannula upon his tooth and quickly introduce the glowing cautery into it and press a little until the patient can feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth; then remove your hand.
Then repeat the cauterization as many times as you may desire.
Then the patient should fill his mouth with saline, hold it for a while, then spit it out. Then the loose tooth will be made firm, the relaxed gum will be tightened, and the corrupt humidity will be dried up.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE.
On cauterization for toothache.
When the toothache arises on account of cold, or if there be a worm in the tooth, and medical treatment does not avail, then cauterization should be undertaken. There are two ways of doing this, one with butter, the other with the cautery.
Cauterization with butter is done thus: take cows' butter and let it boil in an iron ladle or pan; then take cotton wool, wind it round the top of a probe, and dip it in the boiling butter and quickly apply it to the aching tooth and hold it there till cold.
Repeat this a number of times till the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
If you prefer, dip wool or cotton in cold butter and put it on the aching tooth, then on top of that apply the hot iron until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
The actual cautery is administered thus: take a tube of bronze or iron with some thickness in the body of it so that the intensity of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then heat a cautery whose figure will be given shortly, and apply it to the tooth itself and hold your hand until the cautery gets cold. Do this several times over; the pain will certainly depart the same day or the next.
After this cauterization the patient is to fill his mouth with good butter and keep it in for a while, then spit it out. This is the figure of the cautery.
Cauterize with whichever end you prefer according to circumstances.
This is the figure of the tube.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO.
On cauterization of scrofulous tumours.
When the tumours arise from phlegm and cold humidities and are not to be dispersed with medicines and you wish for a rapid dispersal, then heat the hollow cautery of which this is the figure. It is open at both ends to give exit for the fumes of burning from the other end. Place it hot, right on the tumour, once, or twice if need be, till you reach the bottom of the tumour.
If the tumour be small, suit the cautery to the size of the tumour. Then let be for three days and apply cotton wool soaked in butter until the eschar has disappeared.
Then treat with ointments and with plugs of lint till healed. [
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE.
On cauterization for hoarseness and for constriction of the breath.
When humidities prevail over the windpipe, and especially when there is a frigid temperament, the patient should first have his bowels opened with a laxative. Then cauterize him once in the hollow of the jugular fossa at the root of the throat in the hollow part.
Take care that the cautery does not pierce through to the gullet, and burn no more than half of the thickness of the skin.
Then cauterize him once more, strongly, at the junction of the neck with its last vertebra, the cautery being claviform as described above.
Then treat as prescribed before till healed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR.
On cauterization for pulmonary disease and for cough.
When the cough and pulmonary disease arise from cold humidities and the patient suffers from no fever or wasting but the disease is chronic, sear him with two cauterizations over the two clavicles, in the soft depressions ; and with another cauterization in the mid-line of the chest between the breasts. Let the cautery be claviform as described above.
And if you prefer, make punctate cauterizations with the cautery called 'punctate'; its shape has already been described under pricking for earache.
Then treat as aforesaid until healed.
Sometimes also a trident cautery is prepared, in this manner, with which you can burn more speedily; for with this you can apply three cauterizations at once.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE.
On cauterization of the axilla.
When the head of the humerus is dislocated on account of the synovial fluid or when it does not remain in the correct position after the dislocation has been set, so that this becomes a regular occurrence—it is set and then dislocates with the least movement, as we have ourselves seen; you must first set the luxation, then make the patient lie down on his back or on his sound side; then with the fingers of the left hand lift up the skin of the axilla if the joint has dislocated downwards.
Then heat a cautery provided with two spits in this manner.
Then with that burn through the fold of skin till you have perforated to the other side, getting four cauterizations. The cautery may be of three prongs and then the form of the cauterization will be six burns.
Sometimes there is added yet one more so there will be eight burns.
Put on the burns leeks well pounded with salt; then keep the patient absolutely quiet so as not to move the joint for a time till it gains strength.
If the dislocation has gone upwards, which very rarely happens, then cauterize him above the shoulder with one good claviform cautery or with multiple punctured cauterizations. Thus the joint will gain strength and the humidity will disappear and the patient will be cured.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX.
On cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and many humidities get into the stomach, so that its constitution is disturbed and much fluxion has come to it, and a variety of treatment has been tried to no effect, the patient must be put on his back with legs and arms outstretched; then give him a threefold cauterization: one a finger's breadth below the hollow of the chest with the claviform cautery; and two below and to the sides of the first cauterization, so that it has a triangular appearance; but there should be some distance between each lest they run together when suppuration sets in.
Let the depth of the burning be two-thirds of the depth of the skin.
Let the shape of the cauterizations be thus and of no more than this size. If you wish, make a single large cauterization in the middle of the stomach, thus. The cautery for this single cauterization is circular, thus.
The stomach may be cauterized with punctures in the case of a person who fears this operation. You will have marked the points with ink on the stomach, as many as you wish; then sear with a punctate cautery. Then treat as previously described until he be healed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN.
On the cauterization of a cold liver.
When there is pain in the liver from cold and humidity or from thick vapour, so there is a severe disturbance of its natural constitution, and the patient has been treated as prescribed in the appropriate section but with no effect, the patient should lie back, and you should mark with ink the places of three cauterizations, in this form and exactly of this size below the costal cartilages, where the elbow reaches.
Let there be a finger's breadth between each pair of cauterizations and let the burning be straight along the length of the body.
Do not press the cautery hard with your hand.
Let the thickness of the skin you burn be half its thickness, not more; and let the patient be standing on his feet during the cauterization. Alternatively he may be recumbent with legs outstretched and arms raised. Figure of the cautery.
You will also be able to do these cauterizations with the edged cautery when you have craft and facility in the art.
Be careful lest you go too deep with the cautery and burn the whole thickness of the skin and the abdomen and penetrate to the intestine, for the skin there is thin; bear this in mind.
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT.
On incising a tumour of the liver with the cautery.
When there is an abscess in the liver and you are anxious to know if the tumour is in the body of the liver or in its capsule: if it is in the substance of the liver, the patient will be suffering from a feeling of heaviness and no very acute pain.
But if it is in the capsule of the liver there will be the sharpest intensity of pain and you will see that it has baffled the doctors.
Then the patient should lie back on his neck; then mark the place of the swelling with ink. Then heat the cautery in the fire, this being the cautery resembling a probe, of this form, and with that make one cauterization till the whole thickness of the skin is burnt through, finishing up at the capsule so that all the purulent matter comes out.
Then apply the treatment for wounds.
This kind of cauterization should not be employed except by one who has a long experience of the medical art and who has frequent practice at dealing with this kind of disease. Then he can undertake this kind of operation. But in my opinion it would be better to pass it by.
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE.
On cauterization for pleurisy.
The Ancients mentioned a cauterization for cold pleurisy by means of the roots of the long birthwort, in this fashion: you take the longest you can find of the roots of the long dry birthwort, and of the thickness of one finger; dip this in oil and light it at the fire; then burn the patient with one cauterization in the space between the junction of the neck with the clavicle; and two small cauterizations below the jugular veins, inclining slightly toward the region below the beard.
And two big cauterizations above the nipples in the space between the third and fourth ribs; and two more between the fifth and sixth ribs, tending slightly toward the back; and another in the middle of the chest; and another above the stomach; and three more behind, namely, one between the scapulae and two on either side of the dorsal spine below the one between the scapulae.
It is not necessary to cauterize deeply, but let it be a mere hint, in the outer skin.
Now one of the Ancients mentioned that there were some people who used an iron cautery shaped like a probe, and introduced it red hot into the intercostal space until it reached the abscess itself and evacuated the pus, as we have mentioned under tumour of the liver.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is a danger either that the patient may die on the spot or that an incurable fistula may arise at the place.
CHAPTER THIRTY.
On cauterization of the spleen.
When you have treated disease of the spleen by the means that we have mentioned in the section and your treatment is ineffectual, there will be three ways of cauterization, each of which will be correct. One is to make three or four cauterizations in a row over the long axis of the spleen like the cauterization of the liver, a figure of which has been given above.
Let there be between each pair of burns a finger's breadth or a little more. Let the cautery be of the same shape as described above under cauterization of the liver.
Do not put pressure on the cautery. Have the patient's body supine.
The second method is to heat the cautery provided with two prongs, described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder.
Lift up the skin over the spleen at the level of the patient's left elbow; and let the fold of skin lie across the patient's body so that the cauterizations will fall longitudinally.
Then push in the two prongs, well heated, till you have pierced the skin from side to side.
Then take out the cautery; and there are four cauterizations.
Or if you prefer you can burn with the other cautery, of three prongs.
Then dress the site of cauterization after you have allowed pus to run therefrom for many days. This is more effective than any of the preceding treatments.
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE.
On the cauterization of dropsy.
The cautery is particularly effective in ascites.
When you have, without effect, treated a dropsical person with the various measures mentioned in the section on diseases, you should sear with four cauterizations around the umbilicus, and one over the stomach, another over the liver, and another over the spleen, and two behind his back between the vertebrae, one at the level of the breast and one at the level of the stomach; and let the burn be almost skin-deep.
Then keep the burn open so that it suppurates for a long while.
Do not let the patient, after cauterization, be without the necessary treatment, so that you combine both methods for him, and a cure will speedily come to him.
The cautery with which his belly is cauterized should be claviform like the figure previously given; while the one with which his back is cauterized should be olivary.
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO.
On cauterization of the legs and feet.
When, in the sufferer from dropsy, these swell and become full of yellowish fluid, you should cauterize the upper surface of the feet in the depression between the little and fourth toes; hold your hand upright with the cautery; do not let it slant. Then remove your hand and do no more cauterization whatever; for the yellowish fluid will exude.
The cautery should be of this type. Then sear the legs with two cauterizations on each leg; cauterize with the bladed end of the cautery, and let it be along the length of the leg: one under the knee, the other lower than that, about the middle of the leg; and two more cauterizations over each femur.
Leave the burns open without treatment for a long while during which the fluid will exude from them.
Then dress with all that we have described.
CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE.
On cauterization for diarrhoea.
When the diarrhoea is due to frigidity and humidities so that the capacity of the stomach and intestines to hold and to digest is impaired, and this has been treated by various methods and is not cured; if you see that the patient is able to endure the cautery and is of unimpaired strength, make a big cauterization on his stomach according to the preceding instructions for cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery; and four narrow cauterizations round his navel with the thin claviform cautery; and one or two big cauterizations in the lumbar region over the coccyx.
And if you see that the humidities are superabundant, and the patient fit to tolerate it, then make one cauterization over the groin and one over the hypochondrium. You may also add two small ones over the stomach near the big one. This is an effective treatment that does not fail to help.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR.
On cauterization for anal haemorrhoids.
When there are one or more chronic haemorrhoids in the anus arising from thick and cold humours or corrupt humidities, and they have been treated by those measures mentioned in the section, without effect, then sear the patient with three cauterizations over the lowest dorsal vertebra a little below the flat part of the back, triangularly; and one about two fingers' breadth below the navel.
And if you consider that his stomach has become chilled and his food not being digested, and you see his face swollen, then do one big cauterization over the stomach as previously described; and one over his liver; and another over the spleen; with the claviform cautery. Keep the burn open a long while; then dress till healed.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE.
On cauterization of warts after excision.
When you excise warts, heat a spike-shaped cautery and bring it, hot, to the site of the excised wart, and press down till the cautery reaches the mouth of the vessel whence the blood comes.
Do this once or twice over. If the warts be more than one, sear each one separately as we have described ; then dress with suitable ointments till healed.
And if you burn the patient with one big cauterization over the lumbar region that will add to the effect.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX.
On the cauterization of fistulae in the anal and peri-anal regions.
When the patient will not submit to the cutting operation we have described in its own place, and is afraid of it, he may perhaps be cured with the cautery.
So when somebody gets a fistula, and pus and foul humidities have for a long while been running from it, you must first explore it with a fine probe and judge of its depth by the probe.
Then heat a spike-shaped cautery and introduce it, hot, into the fistula, in the direction of the bottom of the fistula and to the depth to which the probe entered.
And repeat the cauterization till all those corrupt bodies are burnt away; once or twice or three times over, as you have need.
But beware of burning a nerve should one be there, or a big blood-vessel. If the fistula penetrates to the urinary bladder or the intestine, beware of all these parts. Do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy part and you judge that it does not open into any other part.
Afterwards dress the place till healed.
If the place cicatrizes and the flux of humours ceases and it remains so for a long while, you may know that it is perfectly healed.
But if the flux of humours from it is not stopped, understand that it has perforated or that at the bottom there is a piece of diseased bone or the like; which will be mentioned in its proper place.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN.
On cauterization of the kidneys.
When pain strikes the kidneys from chill or heavy vapour, and the patient's sexual vigour is impaired thereby, you should burn him right over the kidneys, once on each kidney, with the claviform cautery mentioned before.
I have often burnt him with a third cauterization on the flat of the back, making three cauterizations in a line, which is most effective.
CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT.
On cauterization of the urinary bladder.
When there occurs in the urinary bladder a weakness and relaxation due to chill and humidities, so that the patient cannot retain his water, sear him once below his navel, on the bladder, where the pubic hair begins; burn him once also on the right side and once on the left side of the navel; and let the distance of the burn from either side be the length of the joint of the thumb.
Cauterize him also once on the lower part of the back, or twice if you need.
The cautery should be claviform, as described.
CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE.
On cauterization of the womb.
When matter arises in the womb from chill or humidities and she is thereby prevented from conceiving and her menses are upset; their flow fails or, as they pass, pain accompanies them; then you must cauterize her three times around the navel, as we have mentioned in cauterization of the bladder; and once or twice in the lumbar region in the lower part of the back over the hips. The cautery should be claviform.
CHAPTER FORTY.
On cauterization of a dislocated hip.
Sometimes harmful humidities reach the hip joint and result in its coming out of its place. The symptom of this is that one leg is longer than the other when one is measured against the other; and a hollow is found there [i.e. at the hip].
Then you should cauterize the patient over the hip joint itself with a circular burn, after you have marked with ink a circle round the femoral joint, so that the joint falls in the middle of the circle.
The cautery should be the one whose description has already been given in cauterization of the stomach.
But if you have not this cautery by you, give him three cauterizations with the larger size olivary cautery.
The burn should be to the depth of the whole thickness of the skin. Then dress till healed.
CHAPTER FORTY-ONE.
On cauterization for sciatica.
When pain occurs in the hip joint and is due to cold and humidities, and the patient has been treated by those means mentioned in the section, and the treatment is ineffectual, and the pain becomes chronic, the patient should be purged of the heavy humours with foetid pills or pills of tamarind or the like; then cauterize him.
The means of cauterization in this case is twofold: either with caustic chemicals or with fire.
The actual cautery will serve for several methods. One of them is to make three cauterizations over the femoral joint itself in a triangular manner ; and let them be of a fair depth; and the space between them a finger's breadth. The cautery should be an olivary one.
Sometimes there will also be one cauterization in the middle over the actual head of the femur, making four cauterizations in all.
The burning may be done with the circular cautery which has been mentioned under cauterization of a dislocated hip; a single cauterization so that the circle embrace the whole joint.
This is the form of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is localized in the hip joint and does not extend to the femur and the leg.
But if it extends to the femur and the leg, cauterize him over the thigh with two burns at the place where the patient indicates the pain to be; and one burn four fingers above the great tendon of the heel, a little to the outer side.
The cautery should be edged, and the depth of the burn only to the thickness of the skin.
But if the patient points out that the pain reaches to the toes, then cauterize where he has indicated to you, with a punctate cautery, three or four or more perforations if he needs it.
If he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the shank, give him one burn there with the edged cautery.
Be careful in all your cauterizing not to carry the cautery so far as to burn a nerve or a large artery; for thence arises grave harm, or crippling, to the patient.
I myself have seen more than one person cauterizing over the tendon of Achilles, the cauterization being excessive, and the leg was affected with a defluxion of humours which eventually reached the foot and the whole was riddled; after that came diarrhoea, and, after that, death.
If there is pain in two places, cauterize both in this way.
Certain learned doctors have mentioned a cauterization applicable to the hip in this manner: make a bowl of iron with a diameter of half a span; the thickness of the edge of its mouth should be that of a date-stone or a little less.
Another bowl is introduced into this, and a third into that; and there is a distance between the bowls of a thumb-joint. The bowls are open on both sides; and the depth of them should be a thumb-joint or two. Make an iron handle for them firmly fitted to the bowls. Here is the figure.
Then heat this cautery in the fire until it is hot and sends out sparks; and so let it be applied to the hip, the patient lying on his sound side; and thus three circular cauterizations will be produced at a time.
Afterwards let it be for three days; then smear with butter and leave the wound open for a while; then treat with ointment till it heals.
The author of this book says that we very rarely employ this method of cauterization on account of the ugliness and dread appearance of it, and because we find few patients who will endure it.
Nevertheless, it is one of the best cauteries for him who can endure it and is correctly treated by it.
Cauterization with caustics is thus: make two bowls like the ring into which a door-hinge descends, either of bronze or iron.
The height of their sides should be two thumb-joints or thereabouts, and they should be separated about a finger's breadth; they should be open above and below, and joined one to another thus.
Then place them over the capsule of the hip joint, the patient lying upon his sound side, and press down hard; then pour caustic fluid between the two rings—it should have been heated slightly—and keep it there for the space of one hour by the sand-clock. The patient must endure the sting and heat of it (for he will find it stings like fire) till the causticity diminishes.
Then remove your hand with the instrument and wash away the caustic from the whole capsule with pure water.
Let be for three days and apply butter to it till the eschar comes away; and let the pus flow from it for a few days, for that will be more conducive to healing.
Then treat with ointment till it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip joint or the leg, make a form in some material that will hold the fluid for that, just as you did for the capsule of the femur.
Now this is the description of the caustic; I have already put it in my treatise on the improvement of drugs: take of the salt of potash and quicklime, equal parts, and beat them both up well and put them into a new earthen pot, in the bottom of which you have made a small hole of a size to take a probe.
Place under that pot another one, glazed. Pour enough water on the quicklime and potash to cover them to a finger's breadth after you have pressed them well together with your hand; and leave the pot until the caustic fluid has passed down into the bottom of the glazed pot. Then collect all that fluid and pour it upon a fresh lot of lime and potash.
Then collect all that fluid and pour it upon a fresh lot of lime and potash. Thus will the water be very caustic indeed. This is used for many medical procedures and for the cauterization of all members, as it has the very same action as fire itself.
There are other drugs too with which the capsule of the femur is cauterized, such as Thapsia and Mel Anacardinum and inunction of lime with soap.
Galen, quoting one of the men of old, mentions a treatment for pain in the thigh and sciatica and he makes much of it, asserting that no other treatment was necessary, and that it would heal on one application, so much so that the patient would be carried into the bath and would go out completely cured.
The method is as follows: take fresh green water-cress or new dry water-cress if fresh is not to be had; beat it up well with some fat and apply it to the hip where it hurts, or to the leg or thigh, and bind up.
Then let be for three hours or until the patient feels a diminishing of the caustic; and then let him be taken to the bath.
When his body is bedewed with sweat, get him into the pool; then the pain will vanish and he will be cured.
But you must know that no one should have cauterization with these drugs except after evacuation of the bowel.
Dioscorides has said that cauterization with goats' dung is beneficial for sciatica. The cauterization is carried out in this manner: take wool soaked in old oil and put it into the cleft which is between the thumb and the forearm but nearer to the forearm.
Then take the dried dung of a goat and expose it to fire until it glows like a coal. Place it on the piece of wool, and leave till it cools, then replace it with another, and so on until the sensation has reached the hip joint by way of the forearm, and the pain stops.
This kind of cautery is called 'the dung cautery'.
CHAPTER FORTY-TWO.
On cauterization for pain in the back.
Many different causes give pain in the back. Sometimes it happens from a fall or a blow, or from excessive evacuation or the like. It may also be due to an influx of humid matter.
Cauterization is only to be employed in this last case, which arises from an influx of cold matter.
When the patient has been purged with foetid pills or the like, he should be cauterized in his back where the pain is, over the breadth of the flat of the back, after the place has been marked with ink, with three rows of cauterizations, five in each, or more, in proportion to what you see of the patient's endurance and strength.
Use the punctate cautery.
If you like, you may give him three or four cauterizations with the middle-sized claviform cautery.
CHAPTER FORTY-THREE.
On cauterization of early hunchback.
This disease often occurs in small children.
The sign of the beginning of the disease in a child is that he suffers shortness of breath when standing or moving, and you will find that at the end of his dorsal vertebrae there is one visibly projecting above the other vertebrae.
So when you see this and you wish to stop it, cauterize him with a cautery that should be circular so that the cauterization takes in equally all sides of the vertebra.
If you wish, you can cauterize two or three lines around the vertebra with the punctate cautery; let the punctures be close to one another.
Then dress the place with those remedies we have mentioned, till healed.
But beware of using the cautery in the deformity arising from a nervous spasm.
CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR.
On cauterization of gout and pain in the joints.
When there are pains in the joints from cold humidities flowing into whatever part of the body it may be, and specially when there are pains in the feet, doctors are in the habit of calling that 'gout'.
When gout due to chill has been treated with the various treatments mentioned in its section, and the pains remain, the cautery will remove them.
That is, you cauterize the patient with multiple burns around the joint of the foot, after he has been purged.
The cautery should be a middle-sized olivary one, thus.
If you need to make punctate cauterizations round the front of the foot, use the punctate cautery; and if the pains go up to the knee or other joints, which often happens, burn each knee with three or four cauterizations on every side with the same olivary cautery.
And if you require to cauterize him more than this, do it, but do not go deeply but only about the thickness of the skin.
If the pains go up to the hip joints or the back, employ those cauterizations that we have mentioned in their own chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands only, pierce a double line all around the wrists.
If the pains remain in the fingers, pierce them once over each joint and once on the metacarpus.
And if after some days the pains go up to the elbows or shoulders then cauterize both on each side.
And keep the patient to good habits and taking of medicine; for if his regimen be good and the phlegm got rid of, he will be cured with this cautery.
CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE.
On the cauterization of hernia.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and part of the intestine and omentum comes down into the scrotum, being the onset of the disease, forbid the patient to take food for one day and have him use laxatives to empty the bowel.
Then let him lie on his back in front of you and bid him hold his breath till the intestine or omentum comes out; then put it back with your finger.
Then, below the hernia over the pubic bone, mark a semicircle whose extremities point upward.
Then heat a cautery of this type.
When it is white hot and emits sparks then return the intestine or omentum into his abdominal cavity, and have an assistant put his hand over the place to prevent the exit of the intestine.
You should first have parted his legs and put a pillow under him; let another assistant sit on his legs and another on his chest, holding his hands.
Then apply the cautery to the mark, keeping the cautery upright, and hold it till it reaches the bone; or apply the cautery again a second time if it does not reach the bone the first time.
You must take the greatest care that the intestine does not come out while you are cauterizing, lest you burn it and it result in death or grave injury to the patient.
You must understand that if you do not bring the cauterization down to the bone your operation will not be successful.
For boys the cautery should be slender according to their proportions, and for adults according to theirs.
Then dress the site of the cauterization till it heals. After three days, treat the site of cauterization with butter until the eschar from the burn departs.
Then treat with the usual ointments till healed.
The patient should lie on his back for forty days so that the wound may cicatrize.
Throughout the course of his treatment you must make his diet such as will be gentle with his inside, so that the intestine should not come down during the effort of defaecation.
Then when he wants to get up after the forty days, employ a tight bandage and keep this on another forty days.
He should be moderate in his exertion, his eating, drinking, and shouting. Thus under these rules he will be completely cured.
I shall speak of the treatment of rupture by scission in the appropriate chapter. When a rupture occurs elsewhere in the belly and is at its inception and you wish it not to grow, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery in proportion to its size; burn about two-thirds through the thickness of the skin and treat as we have said; he will be cured and the rupture will not grow.
One of the Ancients said that ruptures were to be cauterized with a three-armed cautery like this.
First mark the rupture with ink; put the transverse line on the upper margin of the rupture and the other towards the lower, and apply a single claviform cautery in the middle. But the first cauterization is easier and better.
CHAPTER FORTY-SIX.
On cauterization for contusion.
When pain occurs in some limb due to a fall or a blow and the pain becomes chronic and medical treatment has no effect upon it, you should cauterize it with the punctate cautery.
In each case the cauterization should be in proportion to the size of the limb, its strength or weakness, and the chronicity of the pain and contusion in it.
If it is cured at the first cauterization, good; otherwise repeat the cauterization. For it is customary for these pains to move from one part to a neighbouring part, and you must follow them with the cautery till the patient is cured.
CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN.
On cauterization for elephantiasis.
Those suffering from elephantiasis are sometimes greatly helped by the cautery; especially that kind that arises from corruption of the phlegm and black bile.
When you wish to use the cautery, first look, and if the elephantiasis be in the early stage and you treat it with those remedies advised in the section but it does not abate and is not arrested, and you fear lest the corruption spread over the patient's whole constitution, then give him five cauterizations on the head: the well-known one in the middle of the head; the second one lower than that, toward the forehead, about the edge of the hair; and two at the temples; and one behind, on the nape of the neck.
And maintain the application of the cautery a little while till a slight mark is impressed on the bone and the outer table is removed from it, that there be an easy exit for the thick vapours. Burn him also one cauterization over the spleen itself in the manner described earlier.
If the elephantiasis be widespread over the patient and appears obvious, you should give him, as well as the cauterizations described for the head: one at the end of the nose; two over the cheek bones; two over the cervical vertebrae; six over the dorsal vertebrae; a great one over the coccyx by the last vertebra of the tail; another above that on the flat of the back; two over the hip joints, one on either hip; two on the knees, one on either knee; two over the shoulders; two on the elbows; and two on the upper part of the breast; and burn him once on each joint of his fingers and toes, and on each ankle and on each forearm.
Be careful not to burn the posterior tendons of his heels.
He may also be cauterized once on the pubic bone; another on the cardia of the stomach; and another on the liver.
You should know that the more you cauterize the more beneficial and effective it will be. You should know also that the patient will not find the cautery painful as a sound man would, since his body is benumbed.
The cauteries should be of the types of instrument mentioned earlier, larger or smaller in proportion to the size of the limb or joint.
Then treat the cauterization with powder of bitter vetch with honey, together with the other treatments, till healed.
CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT.
On cauterization for numbness.
When some limb is affected with numbness and it is treated with drugs and ointments and plasters, but is not cured, burn the benumbed limb itself with cauterizations proportionate to its bigness or smallness.
Let the cauterization somewhat penetrate the thickness of the skin; then dress with ointments till healed.
For numbness that occurs in the hand or foot it is possible to cauterize over the dorsal vertebrae at the exit of the nerve activating that part; and the numbness will go.
This should not be attempted except by one who has a good knowledge of the anatomy of the limbs and of the exits of the nerves that move the body.
CHAPTER FORTY-NINE.
On cauterization for leprosy.
When leprosy is of long standing and no device of medicine has any effect upon it, make a cauterization over it to a slight depth according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness has gone and the colour of the skin altered.
Then treat with lentil flour, oil of roses, arnoglossa leaves, and pigeons' or swallows' blood, of each equal parts mixed all together and spread on lint; let this stick to the place till healed.
CHAPTER FIFTY.
On cauterization for cancer.
When the cancer is in its initial stage and you wish to arrest it, burn all round the circumference of the cancer with the circular cautery.
Some doctors have said that it may be cauterized with one extensive cauterization in the middle. This hardly seems right to me, for I should expect it to ulcerate out; which I have several times seen.
So it is correct to burn around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.
CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE.
On cauterization of boils.
When a person gets a boil which is slow in coming to a head, either because of the superfluity causing it, or because of the patient's age if he be an elderly man lacking in blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the ripening of the boil, then make a punctate burn around it with multiple small cauterizations, and then let be; it will speedily come to a head.
If you wish to perforate it with cauterization, heat the cautery of this type. Apply it to the middle of the boil till it has pierced the skin.
The cauterization should go right to the bottom to facilitate the flow of pus. Then dress till cured.
CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO.
On cauterization of gangrene.
Gangrene is a creeping corruption of a limb, consuming it as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see gangrene in a part which can tolerate the actual cautery, heat a number of claviform cauteries, small or large to suit the site of the gangrene.
Then cauterize it all over till the whole corruption is eradicated and none remains.
Then let be for three days, applying to the cauterized site sulphur beaten up with oil, until the whole eschar comes away, and all the corruption.
Then treat with stimulating ointments.
If after three days you see the flesh growing healthily and no corruption in it, good. Otherwise repeat the cauterization over whatever corrupt parts are left.
Gangrene is also sometimes cured with caustic, for that takes the place of fire; but the actual cautery acts more speedily.
I have already spoken of the treatment of it by caustic in its section, so take it from there when you have need of it.
CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE.
On the cauterization of corns, inverted and otherwise.
This disease, which is something hard paining the foot, very often occurs in the soles of the feet. The cauterization in this case is twofold, actual or caustic.
The actual cautery is to heat a hollow cautery like a vulture's quill, made of iron, narrow of edge, of such a size as to surround the corn all round.
Then put it, hot, on the corn and rotate it till the cautery reaches the root of the corn; and let be for three days to draw the pus; then apply a plaster of wild mallows ground up with salt, and leave the plaster on one night; then it may be drawn out with its root.
Then treat the site of the wound with stimulating salve till it heals.
If the corns are not inverted, which usually happens on the surface of the body and particularly on the hands and feet, you should take a cannula made of bronze or iron or made of a vulture's quill, and place it on the corn or wart; then pour into the cannula a small quantity of caustic solution; keep your hand on it and rotate it, keeping up a slight pressure so that the edge of the cannula impresses a mark at the root of the corn and the caustic makes its way to the root of the corn. Let the patient endure the action of the caustic for a while, then remove it; for the corn may be drawn out with its root.
Treat them in this manner one after another till you have accounted for all of them.
Then treat the site of them, after eradication, with stimulating ointments.
CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR.
On cauterization for tremor.
When someone has a tremor, either from chill in a nerve or quartan fever, or from some other cause, you should cauterize him four or five times over the vertebrae of the back, one between each vertebra, and one on his breast and one on his stomach, with an olivary cautery.
Thus the tremor will be stilled and the dispersal of the cold distemper will be hastened.
CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE.
On the cauterization of pustules occurring on the body.
Foul pustules sometimes arise on the body, caused by heavy corrupt frigid matter. When they first appear you should cauterize the head of each one lightly with myrtle wood whose tip has been lighted in the fire; or with the root of the long birthwort; or with the lenticular cautery.
Sometimes furuncles also are cauterized in the same manner when they first arise; then they get no bigger and the superfluity originating them is dispersed and the patient is cured of them.
But before you cauterize these, the patient must be depleted by bleeding.
CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX.
On cauterization in haemorrhage arising from a cut artery.
Very often there occurs bleeding from an artery which has been cut either by an external wound or in opening an abscess or in cauterizing a part of the body and so on, and it is difficult to stem.
When this happens to anyone, quickly apply your hand to the mouth of the artery, putting your forefinger to it and closing it properly till the bleeding ceases under your fingers and nothing comes out.
Then put in the fire several olivary cauteries, small and large, and blow on them to make them very hot.
Then take one, small or large according to the size of the wound and the site of the opening of the artery, and bring the cautery down right on the artery itself, after promptly removing your finger, and hold the cautery upon it till the blood ceases.
But if it bursts out after you have removed your finger from the mouth of the artery, and the cautery has cooled, promptly take another of the cauteries which you have ready in the fire. Continue doing this, with one after another, till the haemorrhage is stanched.
Mind you do not burn any nerve which may be there, so that another calamity afflicts the patient.
You should know that when there is arterial haemorrhage it is impossible to stop it, especially when the vessel is big, except in one of four ways, to wit: by the cautery as we have said; or by division of the vessel when it is not completely divided, for when it is cut through the ends of it contract and the bleeding is stopped; or by a strong thread ligature; or by the application of styptics with tight bandaging.
But those who try to stop bleeding with ligatures or cloths, or by the application of caustics and the like, never stanch it by these means, or at least very rarely.
And if this happen to anyone and there are available neither doctor nor remedies, let him at once apply his forefinger to the mouth of the vessel as we have bidden and close it firmly till the blood is stanched; and pour over the wound and over the artery, without removing the finger, water as cold as possible till the blood thickens and congeals and ceases to flow. And meanwhile one should be considering what kind of cautery or medicine is indicated.
ON INCISION, PERFORATION, AND VENESECTION, AND WOUNDS AND THE LIKE
IN the first book I spoke of all those diseases for which cauterization is of value, either the actual cautery or that done with caustic medicines; and of their reasons and causes; also the instruments and the shapes of the cauteries. This I set out in chapters, from head to heel.
In this book I shall proceed along the same route so that it will be easy for the inquirer to find what he is looking for.
But before I begin this you ought first to know, my sons, that in this book there is more risk than in the first, which treats of cauterization.
Wherefore in this matter there should be greater circumspection. For in the course of the work of which this book treats there often occurs an effusion of the blood upon which life depends, in the opening of a blood-vessel or the incision of a tumour or the perforation of an abscess or the treatment of a wound or the extraction of an arrow, or in the incising for a calculus or similar cases; all of which are accompanied by uncertainty and fear; and in most death will supervene.
So I warn you against undertaking any case in which there is any element of doubt to you; for in the exercise of the art you will be mobbed by all kinds of persons with all manner of afflictions; some being so weary of their sickness that death itself is a relief on account of the extent of their sufferings and the length of their miseries, their illness being so settled as to presage death.
Some will lavish their wealth on you and enrich you, in the hope that they may be curable, when their disease is mortal.
You should not assist any of this kind who approach you; let your caution be stronger than your greed and desire for gain; and do not embark upon anything of this kind unless you have positive knowledge, which you judge adequate, about the way of bringing the patient a good outcome.
In treating every patient be prescient and foretell the means whereby health may be restored to him. That will help you to obtain renown, glory, fame, and praise.
May God inspire you, my sons, with His guidance, and grant that you hit the mark and succeed; for it is in His hand; there is no God but He.
I have arranged this book in sections as I did with the previous book on cauterizations, from head to heel; so you will the easier find in it what you seek.
CHAPTER ONE.
On the cure of hydrocephalus.
This disease occurs most commonly in infants upon delivery when the midwife grasps the child's head roughly.
It also sometimes happens from some hidden and unknown cause.
I have never seen this disease except in very small children; and death very quickly overtook all those that I have seen; therefore I have preferred not to undertake operation in these cases.
I have seen a child whose head was filled with fluid and daily growing in size, until the child could not sit upright on account of the size of his head, and the humidity increased till he died.
Now this humidity sometimes collects between the skin and the bone; sometimes it collects beneath the bone and over the membrane.
The operation is thus: when the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, an incision should be made in the middle of the head, transversely. The length of the incision should be about two thumb-joints, so that the humidity may flow out. This is the form of the scalpel.
If the humidity is more copious and the swelling greater, make two intersecting incisions to this pattern.
But if the humidity is beneath the bone—and the sign of that is that you will see the sutures of the skull gaping on all sides, the water manifestly yielding when you press in with your fingers—you should make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this pattern.
After incising, draw out all the humidity; then bind up the incisions with pads and bandages; and over the bandages foment with wine and oil till the fifth day. Then loose the bandage and dress the wound with lint and ointments. And do not forget to bandage the head lightly; and feed the patient with a dry diet with little fluid, until the part is strengthened and healed.
Another pattern of incision is to see where the tumefaction and collection of fluid is apparent. For sometimes it is greater in the posterior or anterior part of the head, or to the right or to the left. Therefore make your incision where the tumefaction and dropsy are apparent; incise that place in whatever way you can.
Be careful not to cut an artery lest you cause haemorrhage and the patient die of that haemorrhage at the same time that the humidity is evacuated.
CHAPTER TWO.
When a person gets painful defluxions into the eyes or chest which become chronic, and medical treatment is ineffectual in this case, then section of these arteries will be the most efficacious treatment.
When you decide on section, you should shave the patient's head with a razor; then rub the place with a rough cloth to show up the artery; then bind the patient's neck with an end of his garment; then you will observe where the artery is pulsating (the sites of both are the depressions behind the ears) for it is uncommon for them to remain hidden, except in a few persons.
Then do you mark with ink over both; then cut with a hooked scalpel, cutting down to the bone; the incision should be lateral to the head.
Or if you prefer, introduce the scalpel beneath the artery and make a thrusting cut up at it.
The incision should be of about two fingers' breadth. When cut, the artery gives out a pulsating jet of blood spurting intermittently.
If the artery is not discernible, you should measure three fingers' breadth from the ear, than mark with ink, and cut down to the bone.
The quantity of blood that should be let is six ounces on the average, but often more blood, or less, is withdrawn; all in proportion to the strength of the patient and the fullness of the arteries as they appear to you.
Then examine the wound and if there remains on the bone any part of the membrane cut it off to avoid a haematoma.
Then bind up the wound with a bandage of linen cloth and dress with ointments till healed.
CHAPTER THREE.
On the extraction of the temporal arteries.
When a man has a chronic migraine or acute catarrh, on account of acrid humidities and heat in the temporal muscles, or a violent chronic headache, or the like, and he has been treated with various medical treatments without success, we have sometimes in these diseases tried extraction of the arteries from the temples or cauterization of them, already described.
The manner of extraction is for the patient to shave the temporal hair; then you press upon the artery appearing on the temple; for it will be manifest to you by its pulsation, and is rarely invisible save in a few people or on account of severe cold.
But if it is not plain to you then let the patient bind his neck with the end of his garment; then do you rub the place with a piece of cloth or foment with hot water, till the artery is obvious to you; then take a scalpel shaped thus; then with it gently scrape away the skin till you come to the artery, then stick a hook in it and draw it upward till you extract it from the skin and free it all round from the membranes that are beneath it.
But if the artery be thin, twist it with the tip of the hook and cut out enough of it for the two ends to be well separated from one another and contract so that no haemorrhage occurs; for if it is not divided and cut it will not let blood flow at all.
Then let blood, from six to three ounces.
If the artery be large it should be ligated in two places with a strong double thread; the threads should be either silken or lute-string, lest corruption attack them before the wound is healed, and haemorrhage occur.
Then cut away what remains between the two ligatures; do that immediately or later.
If you wish, you may cauterize it down to the bone with an edged cautery so that the ends of the artery be divided; for this will replace that operation.
It is in fact better, as we have said, unless the patient is feverish or of a hot constitution; cauterization is one of the means of eliminating humidities, so it will be of surer efficacy.
After extraction of the arteries the place must be packed with teased-out cotton wool, and on top of that must be put firm pads. And after loosening the ligature, dress with dry medicaments that encourage growth of flesh, and with bandages,, till it heals.
But if arterial bleeding hinders you in the course of your operation, hasten to stanch it either by cauterization or by filling the place with vitriol, compressing it with your hand till the blood stays; or, if you have nothing of this kind by you, put your finger on it till the blood clots and rinse over the place till the flow dies down; then tie off as you should.
Less serious and easier than excising the artery is to cauterize the vessel with this cautery provided with two blades, having first marked both places with ink. Bring it down, very hot, till it reaches the bone and the artery is cut in two places, so as to put some distance between the two ends, for it will certainly not unite after this cauterization.
This is the form of the cautery.
It should have two sharp blades like two small paring-knives, but they should be much less sharp than a knife, for if they are as sharp as a knife they will quickly lose their heat and the flesh will be slow in cutting.
If they have a certain thickness in them the heat of the fire will be retained in them and they will speedily cut the flesh.
This operation is superior to all and less severe and easier.
Let the distance between the two blades be the breadth of a finger.
CHAPTER FOUR.
On the treatment of a chronic flux of bitter tears into the eyes.
When lachrymation is chronic and arises from the external vessels on the cranium, nor does treatment by any kind of medical remedy have any effect, and you see the patient's features flushed, and he feels a creeping in his forehead like that of an ant, and his eyes are wasted and moist, and the roots of the lashes itch, and the eyelids are burned by the bitterness of the tears, the Ancients were compelled to treat it by this operation which they called 'treatment by the sword'.
You bid the patient shave the hair of his forehead; then you make three parallel incisions across his forehead a little apart; and let the length of each incision be two fingers' breadths; the first incision continuing the line of the nose in the middle of the forehead; and the second at a little distance from the temporal muscle; and the third incision on the other side of the forehead.
Beware of cutting the two arteries which are at the sides, and keep your hand away from the mandibular joint; and let there be a distance between each incision as of three fingers joined.
Have ready by you some pieces of sponge or a number of linen towels to wipe away the blood.
Then introduce the double-edged scalpel shaped thus through the incision near the temple to the middle incision, and with it pare off all the skin between the two incisions with the periosteum; then do the same from the middle incision to the third one; then draw out this scalpel and introduce into the first incision another instrument which is known as 'the knife-shaped': sharp on one side, smooth and blunt on the other, thus.
The sharp edge of it should be turned upward to the subcutaneous tissue and the smooth edge toward the bone; then push it on to reach the middle incision and with it cut all the vessels passing from the head down toward the eyes, without letting the incision come through the outer skin.
Then do the same from the middle incision to the third.
After a moderate quantity of blood has flowed, express the bits of blood-clot from the place and pack into each incision a pad of teased-out cotton wool.
Over all put a pad soaked in wine and oil, or vinegar and oil, lest an effusion occur.
On the third day loosen the bandage and rinse with plenty of tepid water and afterwards dress with balm of basilicon with rose-ointment and other treatments for wounds, until healed.
CHAPTER FIVE.
On the treatment of tears and defluxions in the eyes arising from within the head.
When anyone has a quantity of painful defluxions, acrid and continuous, and you see the eyes wasted and sunken and their sight is weakened and the eyelids are ulcerated and lose their eyelashes; while deep in the head there may be a vehement and grievous pain with incessant sneezing, then you may know from these occurrences that those humours and catarrhs arise from many deep blood-vessels.
The best treatment in this case is that which follows: you bid the patient shave his forehead; then you make one incision in the middle of his forehead or a little above, crosswise (begin the incision from the left temple going toward the right temple; the incision should be down to bone; and avoid the temporal muscles that move during mastication) until the bone is laid bare.
Wipe away all the blood with a sponge and separate the edges of the incision with teased-out cotton wool or with rolls of linen; then bind up with pads over; the pads should be soaked in wine and oil to guard against an effusion.
When you undo it, if you see that an effusion has erupted, you should scrape the bone until a growth of flesh begins in it; then treat with a drying treatment which generates flesh. For example, two parts of wheat flour are taken and of colophonia four parts, and of them a salve is made which may be used to encourage the growth of flesh in wounds of this sort.
CHAPTER six.
On the treatment of things that fall into the ear.
All that falls into the ear comes under four categories: mineral stone, or what resembles stone, such as iron or glass; vegetable grain such as pea or date-stone or the like; or liquid such as water or vinegar; or animal.
When a stone or something of that sort that does not grow gets into the ear, turn the ear toward the sun. If you see the stone, pour upon it a little oil of violets or sesame; then try to get it out by moving the head or by inducing sneezing with ptarmica and keeping the nose closed at the onset of sneezing, having first made round the ear a circle of pieces of cloth or wool and drawn the ear upwards. This treatment will usually bring it out.
But if it does not come out, try to get it out with a fine pair of tweezers shaped thus.
If it comes out with the tweezers, good. But if not, try to extract it with a fine blunt hook slightly curved.
And if this does not bring it out, make a bronze tube and introduce the end of the tube well into the meatus of the ear and fill in round with wax softened with oil so that there may be no outlet save through the tube; then suck it out with all your breath; it will often come out with this.
But if it does not come out with these means we have described, take turpentine resin or bird-lime, a very little; twist some compact cotton wool on the end of a probe and put this on the tip; then introduce it gently into the ear after you have dried out all the moisture from the ear.
But if your treatment so far is unavailing, then be quick and incise before an abscess or spasm supervene.
Now this is the way to incise: first, the patient's cephalic vein should be cut and blood drawn, in proportion to his strength; then seat the patient in front of you and turn his ear upwards; make a small incision at the lobule of the ear in the depression there (the incision should be crescent-shaped) until you reach the stone; then extract it with whatever instrument you may. Immediately afterwards sew up the incision and dress it till healed.
If the object that falls into the ear is one of those grains that grow or swell, then try to extract it by the means already mentioned. If it does not respond to your efforts to get it out, take a fine narrow scalpel like this and with it attempt to cut out whatever kind of grain has entered the ear.
You should not do this except when you are sure that this grain has become moist by reason of the vapours of the ear, so that you may cut up the grain into several small pieces. Then you may extract them with a blunt hook or fine-headed tweezers, or by suction, as we have mentioned; for their extraction will be easy.
As for water getting into the ear, the patient should first employ sneezing excited by ptarmica, his ear having been plugged with a piece of teased-out cotton; he should lie upon that ear in which the water is; and if it so come out, well and good. But if not, take a number of small stones about a finger's length, thin and smooth, and warm them a little in the fire; and have the patient put one of them into the meatus of the ear and let him hop on that one foot on that side; and, with another stone, tap upon the one put into the ear; he should keep this up with stone after stone till all the water has come out.
Sometimes the water is extracted by taking a reed or quill and introducing one end into the ear; then the other end is set alight till the greater part of it is burnt; then repeat time after time with more quills till all the water is got out.
Or else suck it out with a cannula as described for a stone.
As for the extraction of a creature getting into the ear, look to see if it is small of body, such as a flea or the like, in which case treat by those means mentioned in the section. But if it has a large body, conspicuous to the touch, try to get it out with tweezers and hooks; for of all things that stick in the ear this is the easiest to extract.
As for the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you have unavailingly treated it by those methods mentioned in the section in the treatise on instillations, you will need to examine the ear in the sunlight; and if you can see any worms, extract with tweezers or fine hooks.
But if you cannot see any, then take a cannula of this form narrow in its lower part, broad above; and introduce the narrow part into the ear as far as the patient can bear it; then make strong suction through it, repeatedly, till all the worms are extracted.
But if they do not come out in response to your treatment, plug all round the cannula with wax as bidden in treating for a stone. If nothing will bring them out, employ the instillations which I mentioned as having been tried by the Ancients for killing worms; you will find that in the treatise on instillations.
The instillation of oils or drugs should be done with an instrument like this, as you will see; you make it of silver or bronze, narrow at its lower end, with a small perforation, and wide at its upper part.
If you wish, you may make the obturator which goes in the cannula of strong bronze; or, if you like, take a probe and wrap cotton wool tightly round its tip; then pour into the cannula oil, juices, or whatever of these remedies you want, with the cannula in the ear. Then introduce the probe with cotton wool on it and press moderately until the oil is ejected into the meatus and the patient feels it enter.
Let that which you put into the ear first be slightly warmed at the fire; and be careful that it be neither very hot nor very cold, for the ear is not suited to bear that.
CHAPTER SEVEN.
On the treatment of obstructions in the ear.
Infants sometimes are born with an imperforated auditory meatus. Some people also get an obstruction in the passage of the ear, either from an injury or from flesh growing in it. Sometimes this obstruction is at the bottom of the ear out of sight, but sometimes it occurs a little outside the passage and is invisible.
The sort which occurs in the depths of the ear and is invisible is, in general, difficult to cure.
As for that which is within sight, set the patient's ear in the sun and examine it; and if you see that the object is something external you should make an opening with a fine scalpel like this.
Let its extremity be slightly broad, with a sharp point; while the rest of the scalpel should be smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear.
But if the obstruction be from flesh growing in the auditory meatus, catch it with a fine hook and cut it, with the utmost gentleness, till all the flesh is gone.
If the obstruction be in the depth of the ear, take a fine smooth probe and warm it a little in the fire; then push it into the meatus.
If you feel the obstruction (what time the patient will experience hardness of hearing), seek to perforate it gently, being careful not to injure the nerve of the ear.
Then put in a plug the width of the meatus, which you will have anointed with Egyptian ointment; do this for some days till you are sure that the wound is healing. Or take a plug and dip it into water and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol and use that. If you perceive the ear swelling with an abscess you should remove the plug and put in its place another previously prepared by soaking in wax made with oil of roses, till the abscess has subsided; then dress till it is healed.
If a haemorrhage occur, dip a sponge or piece of material in cold water and put it on the ear, and apply the rest of the treatment to stop haemorrhage mentioned in the treatise on instillations.
CHAPTER EIGHT.
On the treatment of warts on the eyelids.
These warts which occur on the eyelids are sometimes humid, sometimes dry.
You should hold them with forceps or a hook, and cut them away from the roots with a scalpel; then put powdered vitriol on the place.
If there is bleeding from them, cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery.
Cauterization of them after excision is best, for they often return when a part of their roots is left behind; but when they are cauterized the roots are burnt and they will not come back.
CHAPTER NINE.
On the treatment of stones occurring in the eyelids.
There often occurs in the eyelids a thing resembling a hailstone in its strength and hardness, and therefore called 'hail'.
It is actually a collection of thick humours in the upper or lower lid.
The operative treatment for it is thus: examine; and if the stone is external on the outer aspect of the lid, and mobile in all directions, dealing with it is simple.
You make above it a transverse incision; then scrape gently around it till it is free; then catch it up with a hook and cut it away.
If the incision be big, gather it up with a suture and dress it till it heals.
If it be small, it will be no trouble, for ointment will restore it and heal it.
If the stone is rather toward the inner aspect of the eyelid, then invert the lid and catch up the stone with a hook—you will not need to incise the lid—and cut it all round. If the lid is pierced in the cutting, it will do no harm at all.
Then, after cutting away the stone, wash the eye with salt water; then treat with cicatrizing medicines till healed.
CHAPTER TEN.
On the treatment of hydatid in the upper lid.
Hydatid is fat which arises in the folds of the upper lid. It is a disease chiefly occurring in children, irritating their eyes, giving them morning catarrh; they are unable to look full into the light of the sun, since they get an immediate secretion of tears.
And for that reason you will find them lying always on their faces, and they also sleep on their faces; and the eyelids below the eyebrows are moist and covered with swellings, while the hydatid stands out prominently; and when you press upon the place with your finger you can feel the fat beneath it.
The manner of operating is for the patient to let his head rest in your lap. Then you take a scrap of linen and prepare a pad of it. Make it into a circle of sufficient size to enclose the whole of the hydatid on all sides, then place it on it and squeeze with your fingers on all sides, so as to gather up the hydatid in the centre of the circle. Then in the middle of this humidity make a crosswise incision with a lancet, but do not let the incision be larger than that made for a venesection.
As to the depth, the skin should be incised right through till you come to the hydatid, which in most cases will come out from the incision, in the shape of a white piece of fat.
Draw it out with a cloth rolled between your fingers, turning your hand to right and to left till it is separated.
Be careful not to go so deep with your scalpel that it sticks in the eye and injures it.
If you do not see the hydatid at the first incision, you must gently cut a little deeper till it comes forth, then draw it out as described. Then dip some cloth in vinegar and water, apply to the place and bind it up with pads.
There are some who grind up salt and put it in the hollow of the incision to liquefy thereby the remains of the humidity.
Then dress till healed.
If an effusion occur in the place, treat with sedative plasters till healed.
CHAPTER ELEVEN.
On the various methods of blepharoplasty.
When superfluous lashes grow on the eyelid outside their natural place, below the natural lashes, and continue, they injure the eye and give rise to many kinds of disease, such as chronic lachrymation, dropping of the eyelids (ptosis), and whiteness and opacity, eventually resulting in the destruction of the eye. The plastic operation on the eye is carried out in four ways: by the actual cautery; by caustic in the way mentioned above in the book on cauterization; by incision and suture; or with canes, as I shall describe.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then with your left hand turn out the eyelid. Now if it thus becomes everted, good; otherwise introduce a threaded needle beneath the eyelid and pass the needle up; let that be near the hair itself.
Then draw the thread up with the lid and invert the lid with a probe; then make an incision on the inside of the lid below the superfluous lashes with the lancet, from the greater to the lesser angle. Then draw out the thread and put beneath the lid a small pad of cotton or linen; then mark with ink on the eyelid the shape of a myrtle leaf.
The shape should be according to the amount you wish to raise the lid, and varies in different people. In some cases you should cut away a fair amount in proportion to the ptosis but in others a smaller incision is enough; all this in due proportion to the extent of the ptosis.
Then with a scalpel incise over the two lines you have marked, beginning at the greater angle and going toward the lesser angle; and let one incision be close to the natural lashes, at a distance of about the breadth of a probe.
Then introduce a hook into one angle of the skin and peel it all off; then join the edges with a needle and a fine woollen thread and wipe away the blood; and stick the ends of the threads to the eyebrow with adhesive, if you like; but if you do not it does not matter.
Then let the suture and the threads remain for about three or four days, then dress.
If you like, you may leave the wound without suture and treat it with drying medicaments and styptics; then the eyelid will be lifted as the wound heals and comes together; but suture is better. The Ancients mention this method of operating.
It involves some burden for the patient; but the operation is good and safe.
Yet another way of operating is to mark on the eyelid the figure of a myrtle leaf as we have described; then lift the eyelid with three hooks, either separate or joined thus.
But if you cannot conveniently hold with the hooks, take a threaded needle and introduce it into the middle of the marking; and put another thread through near the greater canthus, and a third thread near the lesser canthus. With your fingers hold the threads evenly and then raise your hand evenly and you will raise up the whole of the marked skin as we have said.
Then bring the edges together with a suture and dress till healed.
But if in your incision, or the opening you have made, a swelling arises, then allay the swelling with wax and similar sedatives.
Sometimes the lower lid also has the lashes inverted. For this you should use any of the methods we have mentioned: the incision and suture, and the operation by the actual cautery and by caustic. ( The operation by the actual cautery or caustic) is more effective, and easier on the patient, than incision and suture, (but incision and suture) is more workmanlike in either lid.
Trimming the lid by means of canes is done as follows: you invert the eyelid and cut the inner slit as I have described; then you prepare two slender canes or rods of a length equal to that of the eyelid and a breadth less than that of a scalpel; and at either end of each you make a notch to hold the threads.
Then gently put them together over the superfluous part of the eyelid and tie them firmly together at both ends and leave for a few days; for the ligated flesh will necrose and turn black and putrefy and eventually fall away spontaneously.
But if it is slow in sloughing, cut off with shears; then dress till healed.
And when it is healed the eyelid will be raised and the lashes will no longer irritate the eye.
Now this is the figure of the canes; you should prepare them exactly in this shape and of this length and breadth.
CHAPTER TWELVE.
On the removal with the needle of irritating lashes from the eye.
If it be one or two hairs the operation will be to take a fine needle, thread it with a fine smooth silk, bring the ends together, and knot them with a tiny knot; the thread should be about a span in length.
Then in the loop insert another fine thread, shorter than the first, and join the ends with a knot if you wish.
Then let the patient put his head in your lap in full sunlight, so that the operation may be clearly seen, because it is very fine work.
Then introduce the needle with the loop to the root of the superfluous hair and run it quickly through the eyelid till you make it come out above the natural hair.
Then draw the thread to the top of the loop and introduce that hair into the loop if it be one, two, or three, but not more.
Then draw away your hand with it until the hair emerges with the loop on the eyelid among the natural hair.
If you pull the loop and the hair does not come out with it, you draw the loop down by means of the thread which you have previously passed through it, until the loop comes out at the upper perforation.
Then extract loop and thread and take them both out, and bind the eye and leave it bound for two or three days till the hair be fixed in its place and there is regeneration of flesh over it.
If the hair be short, put with it a long natural hair so that it may be raised together with that; or let the hair grow till it reach a greater length, then raise it.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN.
On entropion occurring in the upper eyelid.
The eye that suffers this inversion of the lid is called 'leporine' (i.e. hareeye). Now sometimes this inversion is natural, sometimes acquired. It is acquired either from the cicatrization of an injury, or an incision, or cauterization, or the like.
The idea of the operation is to excise the scar, separate the edges of the wound, pack linen between them, and bandage up till healed.
In the treatment of it you should not use anything styptic or drying, for if you do the inversion will return worse than ever before.
Employ relaxing substances such as fenugreek; and fomentation with water in which mallows and linseed have been boiled; and diachylon plaster which has been previously softened with one of the oils and spread on the packs; and treat it with this.
The main thing in the treatment is to use every device to prevent the healing up of the place as it was before.
This operation which we have described is but some correction of the inversion, not that the appearance of the place will necessarily revert to what it was.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN.
On the treatment of entropion of the lower lid.
This inversion in the lower lid is that which is truly called entropion; and it is either congenital or acquired.
It is acquired by injury or incision or cautery or something like that.
This is the method of operating for it: you take a needle through which has been passed a double thread and you run it into the flesh, making it penetrate from the left angle of the eye to the right angle so that the thread is fixed in flesh both ends.
Then with the needle stretch the flesh upwards and make an incision with a broad scalpel; and if the eyelid returns to its proper shape, well and good. But if not, take a probe and put it on the site of the incision and with it turn back the lid.
Then make two incisions on the inner side of the lid; the two incisions should begin from the angles of the incision already made and run together making an angle so that when they join they are like this.
It is the Greek letter lambda.
You remove that flesh in proportion as the angled side is lower than that adjoining the lid; then bring the divided parts together with two sutures made with a woollen thread.
Then treat with the relaxing medicaments and dressings we have mentioned, till healed.
But if the inversion is acquired, from incision, suture, or cautery, you should make a simple incision below the eyelashes, as has been described, then bring apart the two edges with a packing, as we have said.
The sum of what there is to say about the treatment of inversion, whether it is in the upper or the lower lid, is that you should make your procedure follow the actual lines of the inversion itself ; for this is of varying shape.
The experienced practitioner will make use of his skill in any way he can to re-establish the natural form or approximate to it. The disease itself will generally indicate to you the appropriate operation and instruments.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN.
On adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
This adhesion happens to many people, the upper lid sticking to the white of the eye and hindering its movement and preventing its natural functions. You should introduce the end of a probe beneath the lid and raise it upward; or stretch it with a hook.
Then cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel; it should not be so sharp as a cutting scalpel, but somewhat blunt, lest during the operation the patient should shake, and the scalpel slip, and the edge injure the eye.
Let your incision be as if peeling off the adhesion. Wait until the lid regains its natural shape and the adhesions be wholly healed.
Then rinse the eye with saline and cleanse it; or instil into it drops of a watery solution of eye-lotion of verdigris.
Then separate between the eye and the lid with a linen pad and put over the eye a piece of wool moistened with white of egg; and after the third day employ healing eye-lotions till it is better.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN.
On incision of ungula and excrescence of the canthus.
Ungula occurs in two forms: either the nervous, which resembles a fine hard membrane; or the non-nervous, like a white congealed humidity; which, when the iron touches it or you try to pick it up with a hook, is cut through and the hook has no hold on it.
Both kinds grow from the greater angle of the eye, whence they spread little by little until they cover the pupil and block both the vision and the movements of the eye.
This is the method of incision: the patient places his head in your lap and opens his eyes; then you raise the lid with your hand; then with a gently curved hook pick up the ungula and pull it upward; then take a needle threaded with a horse hair or an ox hair, and a strong thread; slightly curve the end of the needle; then thrust it into the middle of the ungula, piercing it with the needle; and tie the ungula with the thread and pull upwards; and, with the hair, peel the side of the ungula adjoining the pupil, and divide it with a sawing motion right through.
Then what is left in the root of the angle cut out with a fine scalpel, or with small scissors; and leave the natural caruncle in the canthus lest, in cutting it away, a chronic flux of tears occur.
The ungula may be drawn out with the hook alone or with the thread as we have said, and scraped away with the smoothtipped scalpel of this form.
But beware lest the scalpel touch the corneal covering and cause a fissure in it and the pupil protrude.
Then after the incision put into the eye a little powdered salt or an eye-lotion of verdigris, and leave it till the following day; then treat as may be necessary till it heals.
If the ungula is non-nervous in origin and you cannot transfix it with a needle nor get a hook to hold fast in it, this sort is often successfully treated by medical means. So treat as described in the section.
But if you prefer to cut it, open the patient's eye, and take a fine smooth scalpel, rather blunt, like this and with this gently scrape away the ungula from above; and if you see that it is crumbling away and breaking down under the scraping, then immediately instil into the eye some eye-lotion of verdigris, or the red eye-lotion, or a little powdered salt, and bind the eye up till next day.
Then repeat the operation on it till you have removed it all, unless an abscess forms in the eye, in which case cease the operation and treat the abscess till cured.
Then repeat the treatment with the same scraping till healed.
As for a protuberance of flesh in the angle, if it causes great hurt pick it up with a hook and cut part of it away, with not too big an incision lest there be a flux of tears.
Then into the canthus instil red eye-lotion or lotion of verdigris till healed.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.
On cutting for chemosis and superfluous flesh in the eye.
Sometimes in the eye of certain people a red granulation grows up and increases so as to block the pupil or nearly so; or it grows over the eyelids and often turns the lids outward, and it resembles the blossom of the pomegranate.
You operate for this by having the patient put his head in your lap; then he opens his eyes and you gather up the granulation whole, with suitable hooks, or hold it with tweezers or forceps. Then you cut away the first bit of flesh and then the next, until you have cut it all away; and beware of damaging the eye in the course of operation.
Your incision should be made with the scalpel which we described for the incision of pterygium; or with small scissors like those with which one gathers up pannus, as shown in the chapter after this.
And when you have finished your incision and removed all the chemosis, fill the eye with powdered salt or instil the red powder or similar corrosive; and apply to the outside of the eye cotton wool with white of egg to ward off an abscess.
If there is any chemosis left and blood is getting the better of you and you fear an abscess, then desist and treat the eye with those means for settling a tumour. Thereafter return to your operation till cured. So must you do with superfluous flesh that arises in the eye.
But you must avoid treating surgically any eye that is weak, whether congenitally or by acquired disease. Never set your hand to an operation of this kind till you have seen if the organ can endure such an operation.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.
On gathering up pannus from the eye.
Pannus is a network of blood-vessels spreading over the eye so as to interfere with the function of sight and, in the course of time, weakening the eye.
You must first examine, and if the eye with the pannus be strong, with no fault other than the pannus, then the pannus should be gathered up.
This is done by bidding the patient put his head in your lap; then, as skilfully as you may, pick up those blood-vessels with one or two hooks. The hooks should be of a gentle curve, like this.
Or there can be two hooks joined together on one handle, thus.
Then take up the blood-vessels gently with the fine scissors, and wipe away the blood constantly, till you see all those blood-vessels removed from the eye, and the blood wells forth.
But be careful of the eye lest you damage it with the points of the scissors. Let your work be done in broad sunlight at midday; and be very steady in your action so as to cut nothing beside the bloodvessels.
When you have finished, instil the red or green lotion into the eye to destroy by its caustic action the remnants of the pannus.
If you are unable to gather it all up at that one time, apply a plaster to the eye such as will allay the pain, and leave him* for a few days till* the pain be eased and there is no danger of an abscess.
Then repeat the operation in the same manner till it is healed.
This is a figure of the scissors. [
CHAPTER NINETEEN.
On turning a fistula into the nose.
When you have treated it with the cautery or with caustic according to the instructions given previously, and it is not healed, there is no clear method of treatment except to cut down on the tumour at its ripening and let out all the humidity or pus therein, till you reach the bone.
When bone is reached and you see necrosis or blackness, scrape it with an instrument like this.
It is called 'rough-head' and is made of Indian iron. Its head is round like a button but is engraved with markings finely engraved, like those of a file or a rasp.
Place it on the site of the diseased bone and spin it between your fingers, pressing down a little with your hand, till you are sure all the diseased bone has been scraped away.
Do this several times. Then let the place be dressed with stanching and styptic remedies.
And if the place heals and flesh is generated there and the flow of sanies is stayed and there is no return after leaving for forty days, and there is no swelling, and nothing emerges, you may know it is perfectly healed.
But if not, there is no other means for it but to turn the fistula into the cavity of the nose, in this style, namely, that you lay bare the bone a second time, either by an instrument or by caustic; and when the bone is uncovered, then take a drill like this.
Its extremity, which is of iron, should be triangular; and its wooden handle should be conical in shape, and, as you see, tapering to the extremity.
Then put it to the bone itself near the canthus; but keep your hand a little away from the eye; then with your hand rotate the drill till the bone is perforated; and the patient will have the sensation of this, since, if he holds his hands over his nose he will find the breath coming out through the hole.
And then dress the place with styptic and stanching remedies as I have taught you.
And when the flesh begins to grow and the place gets hard, the matter which before was coming outward will be turned into the nose; and this will be easier for the patient.
CHAPTER TWENTY.
On the reduction of exophthalmos.
When the whole eye is prominent and there is no reduction or impairment of vision, you should get the patient's bowels open. Then venesect him in the cephalic vein; then apply cupping vessels to his neck without scarification and draw off by gentle suction; then put to the eye a poultice made of acacia and aloes and olibanum and sarcocolla; then bandage the eye over the application with many pads.
The way to make pads is to take a number of soft rags and fold each into four thicknesses. Prepare a good many.
Then put them one on top of the other as the eye requires; then bind on stiff bandages over these, tying them firmly. Repeat the cupping with suction and without scarification. Then take away the cupping vessel and leave the eye bandaged a day and a night.
If the bandaging slackens during that time, it must be tied properly.
Then remove the bandaging after a day and a night, as we have said.
If you see that the eye has receded, good. Otherwise repeat the applications and pads and bandages and the cupping till it does recede.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE.
On cutting for staphyloma.
When a rupture befalls the uveal membrane so that it swells and protrudes outside the eyelids looking like a grape, and on this account the man's features are disfigured; if you intend to cut it away the operation will be as I am about to describe. You introduce a needle to the root of the uvea from the lower to the upper segment; then you introduce another needle threaded with a double thread, from the region of the canthus major where you will perforate it; and leave the first needle in its place. Then cut the place of doubling of the doubled thread, and with it ligature that part of the excrescence around the needle and tie it well.
Then remove the needle and apply to the eye wool moistened with egg-white; and leave till the thread falls away with the growth.
Then treat the eye with fortifying dressings till the wound be healed.
Sometimes the uvea is tied all round with a circle of material so that the prominence of the eye is greatly increased. Then you perforate it with a fine scalpel going to the depth of the eye; and an albuminous humour will flow out and the eye will shrink and return at once.
Then bandage till healed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO.
On the treatment of hypopyon.
This disease which is called 'hypopyon' is a collection of pus in the eye which resembles cataract but is not so.
The method of operating in this disease is to make the patient sit upright on a chair before you. Take his head on either side with your hands and shake it about till you can see the pus come down; then it will be fixed and not move; and the light will pass and the patient will see things as he was before.
But if it does not come down, we know it is cataract.
But if the pus is not ready to be brought down by this method, then seat the patient in front of you; then take a fine scalpel and cut a little above the corneal tunic near the coronal junction of conjunctiva and cornea, till the pus comes out.
When it comes out, instil warm water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey.
Then treat as usual till healed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE.
On the couching of cataract.
We have already mentioned in the appropriate section the varieties of cataract and those in which depression is useful, in full detail; so you may take it accurately from there.
You should cause the patient to sit down cross-legged before you, facing the light in full sun, and firmly bind up his sound eye.
Then lift up his eyelid with your left hand, if it be the left eye in which the humour is; or with the right hand if it be the right eye.
Then take the couching needle in your right hand if it be the left eye; or in your left hand if it be the right eye.
Then put the tip of the needle near the corona, about the thickness of a probe away, onto the white of the eye itself, on the side of the lesser canthus.
Then thrust the needle firmly in, at the same time rotating it with your hand, until it penetrates the white of the eye, and you feel that the needle has reached something empty.
The depth the needle goes in should measure as the distance from the pupil to the edge of the iris, which is the corona of the eye; you will see the metal in the pupil itself because of the transparency of the corneal tunic.
Then put the needle up to the place containing the humour; then press the point downwards time after time. If the humour comes down at once, the patient will at once see whatever his vision is opened upon while the needle is still in his eye.
Then let him rest a little while; and if the humour goes back up again depress it a second time without taking the needle out.
When it stays down firmly and does not come back again, gently draw the needle out, twisting it ever so slowly with your hand. Then dissolve a little pure rock-salt in water and wash the eyeball with the solution; then apply all over the outer aspect of the eye carded linen or wool moistened with oil of roses and egg-white, and bandage it up together with the sound eye.
Now we and our contemporaries apply pounded cumin with the egg-white.
But if the couching needle does not serve, failing to enter the eye on account of its hardness (for there are some whose eyes are hard indeed), you should take the scalpel called al-baridl figured thus.
With this make a perforation in the conjunctiva only, not piercing any further; for that is only to make a little entrance for the needle.
And then thrust in the needle as we said before.
At the end of your operation, prepare a solidly-built bed on which the patient may lie on his back, in a dark room; and keep him from all movement or coughing.
And prescribe such a diet for him as will relax his system; neither let him move his head to right or to left.
Let the bandage remain in the same position till the third day.
Then loosen it in the same dark room and make trial of his sight, putting before him objects to be seen; then replace the bandage till the seventh day.
You should not do this at the time of treatment nor immediately after the perforation by the needle; but on the contrary you should avoid it, for intensive use of the eye causes a rapid ascent of the humour.
But if an abscess occur you should unbandage the eye before the seventh day and restore it to health by those methods that allay swelling.
When it has subsided, allow him free sight, putting over his face a dark veil beneath which his vision may be exercised for a few days while he is still in the dark room.
Then let him come out of the room gradually and take up the exercise of his business.
But you should know that in the case of a depression of a cataract the student cannot manage without having seen that operation performed several times; then he may perform it himself.
I have heard that a certain Iraqi has said that in Iraq he makes a hollow needle by which the humour is sucked out.
In our land I have never seen anyone do it in this fashion, nor have I read of it described in any of the books of the Ancients; perhaps it is newly invented.
Here are the figures of some kinds of needle for the information of those who do not know them.
They are mostly made of brass; and their extremities should be of this very fineness, triangular at the tip and sharp.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR.
On the treatment of nasal polyp.
Sometimes there arise in the nose various superfluous fleshy growths. One of these is a thing resembling a centipede; another, a cancerous growth, stony, hard, and pale in colour; another again is a soft growth, not pale.
Any of these growths that is soft is not malignant or cancerous. You should make the patient sit before you, facing the sun, and dilate his nose and introduce a hook into these polyps and draw them out; then amputate what you can take hold of, with a fine scalpel sharp on one side, till you know that all the growth is gone. And if there be anything of them left behind that you cannot cut away, then gently scrape away with any fine instrument till nothing of them remains; and if the bleeding be too much for you, or an abscess occur, then combat it by suitable means. If it be a malignant swelling, then speedily cauterize till the bleeding stops and all the polypi are gone.
Then introduce into the nose, after the incision, vinegar and water, or wine; and if the nose be free and fluid flow into the throat from it, then know that he is cured.
But if fluid does not pass through it as it should, you may know that there is a polyp within in the upper part of the ethmoid bone where the instrument could not reach to make incision.
In this case you must take a linen thread, rather thick, and tie many knots in it with a space of a finger's breadth or less between each pair of knots; and let the patient try to get one end of the thread into his nose with a probe or anything he can, after making it into the form of a button; and let him make a full inspiration till it reaches the cartilage and comes out through the throat.
Boys at school often do this sort of thing, and it is quite easy for anyone who wishes.
Then hold together the two ends of the thread, one coming out through the mouth and the other remaining in the nose; then saw off the polyps by means of the knots in the thread ; continue doing this till you are sure that the growth has been cut off by the knotted thread.
Then take out the thread and, after wiping away the blood, put into the nose a plug dipped in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or longer till the ointment has consumed the remnants of the polyp.
Then, last of all, insert a lead tube in the nose for a few days till healed.
If he need treatment with drying medicaments, use them.
This is the figure of the instrument for instillation by which oil or medicines are dropped into the nose.
It should be made of silver or bronze like a small lamp, its oil-container open, and with its channel likewise.
If you like you may make its spout closed like a reed; and the oil-container of the instrument can be made covered over. It has a handle at the end, as you see, to hold it when heating the oil or whatever juice or other liquid you wish.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE.
On warts growing on the end of the nose.
There frequently spring from the end of the nose warts that grow and increase daily till they disfigure the man.
So you should cut them out when they first appear; totally eradicate them and apply to the place cauterization, either actual or by caustic.
But if excision of them has been overlooked till they have grown big, then examine, and if the growth is stone-like, hard, and pale in colour, and with little sensation, do not interfere with it with an instrument, for it is a cancerous tumour. For I have often seen people cut these tumours, and great affliction resulted to the sufferer.
But if the tumour be soft to the touch, not pale coloured, and you see it can be wholly removed, then purge the patient, and cut it off him fearlessly, and treat the place with astringents and styptics till healed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX.
On suture of nose, lip, and ear, when there is discontinuity from a wound or the like.
You should know that when discontinuity occurs in one of these cartilages, treatment of them rarely does any good, except in a few people.
When such a thing happens to anyone, look carefully, and if the wound be fresh and bleeding, bring the edges of the wound together with a suture, and dress them till they are healed.
If the discontinuity has separated the edges, and both edges have healed, it is necessary to scrape both edges on the external skin till they bleed; then bring the edges together with a suture and dust over it dragon's blood and olibanum; and put over the powder a plaster of Palm ointment or some other of the regenerative ointments, and leave bandaged for two or three days; then unbandage and change the medicine, and let the sutures come away of themselves; and afterward dress with ointment till healed.
Now the manner of suturing is to close the discontinuity, either with a needle, as we describe for suture of the belly, or with a thread as we tell you there.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN.
On the extraction of nodules occurring on the lip.
A good many people sometimes get little hard swellings inside their lips, some resembling the vetch grain; some larger, some smaller.
You should invert the lip, incise all along each nodule, catch it up with a hook, and cut it away all round. Then after incising rub pounded vitriol into the places until the bleeding stops. Then let him rinse with vinegar and salt, and dress the place with styptic drugs till the wounds heal.
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT.
On the excision of superfluous growths on the gum.
There often grows on the gum superfluous flesh which the Ancients call 'epulis'. You should take it up with a hook or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root and let the pus or blood flow out.
Then put on the place either pounded vitriol or one of the absorbent styptic powders.
And if the growth returns after treatment—for they often return—excise a second time and cauterize; it will not come back after cauterization.
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE.
On scraping the teeth with an iron instrument.
Sometimes there collect upon the inner and outer surface of the teeth and also between the gums, rough scales, ugly, sometimes black or yellow or green, from which corruption is communicated to the gums and thus the teeth become unsightly.
The patient should sit before you, putting his head in your lap; and you should scrape the teeth or molars on which you can discern crusts or gritty substance, till nothing remains; do them all in the like manner, black, green, yellow, and the rest, until they are all gone.
If they disappear at the first scraping, good; but if not repeat the scraping on the following day and the second and third until you attain your purpose.
You should know that molars need scraping-tools of many diverse forms and shapes according to the character of your undertaking; for the tool with which the inner surface of the teeth is scraped differs from the tool with which the outer surface is scraped; and that for scraping between the teeth is different again. Here is a number of scrapers, all of which you will have ready by you
CHAPTER THIRTY.
On the extraction of teeth.
You should treat toothache with every device and be reluctant to extract; nothing can replace the tooth when it is extracted, for it is a noble substance—until there is no means of avoiding extraction.
When the patient is determined to have it out, act with deliberation till you are sure which is the painful tooth; for often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks the pain is in a tooth that is sound, so he has that one extracted; but the pain does not abate until the diseased tooth is removed. We have frequently seen this happen in the practice of the barber-surgeons.
When you are quite sure which is actually the painful tooth you should cut away all round the tooth with a scalpel having a certain measure of strength, until the gum is separated all round.
Then, with your fingers, or with a pair of fine forceps, first move the tooth slowly and gently till you stir it; then get a good grip on it with a pair of large forceps, holding the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move. Then draw the tooth straight out so as not to splinter it.
And if it will not come out, then take one of these following instruments and gradually introduce it beneath the tooth all round; then try to move it as you did before.
If the tooth has a hole in it or is decayed, you should plug the hole with a rag, forcing it in with the tip of a fine probe so that it will not break when you grip it with the forceps.
You must completely scarify all round the gum. Take the utmost care not to splinter the tooth lest a piece should remain behind and arouse the patient's ills afresh, causing greater pain than before.
Take care not to do those things that the ignorant barber-surgeons do in their rashness and haste in dental extraction, neglecting to employ the methods we describe. For they often bring great troubles upon people, the least of which is to break the tooth off short, leaving the whole or part of the root behind; or to remove the tooth together with a piece of the jaw bone, as I have often seen.
Then after the extraction let the patient rinse with wine or vinegar and salt.
If there occur haemorrhage from the place—a common occurrence—then pound up a little vitriol and stuff the place with it. If the vitriol does not avail, cauterize.
The shape of the fine forceps with which you first move the tooth should be with long jaws and a short handle, thick, lest they bend when you take hold of the tooth.
As you see, they have thick handles so that when you apply pressure with them they do not give or bend; and short jaws.
They should be of Indian iron or of steel, strongly made, the jaws tempered and having teeth fitting into each other so that a sure and firm grip may be obtained. Sometimes the jaws are made like a file, also to give a strong grip.
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE.
On the extraction of roots and of broken pieces of mandible.
When, in extracting a tooth, a broken-off root remains behind, you should apply to the place cotton wool soaked in butter for one or two days to soften it; then insert the tongs or forceps with stork-bill jaws; this is the figure of the forceps.
The point should be made like a file or rasp on the inside.
If it does not respond to your attempt to extract it with these forceps, you must dig down over the root and remove all the flesh, and then insert the instrument that resembles a small crowbar; this is its figure.
It has a short rather thick extremity, and should not be tempered lest it fracture.
If the root comes out, good; if not, get assistance from the other instruments figured here. First, with a triangular point, somewhat stout.
Another, triangular and slender.
Sometimes also we get help from this forked instrument and beside this, from other instruments and appliances mentioned above under scraping of teeth. Sometimes also recourse may be had to this instrument resembling a large hook, figured thus.
The hooked extremity is triangular in section, of some thickness lest it break, not tempered.
You should know that dental instruments are very numerous, as are the other instruments, almost beyond reckoning.
And the experienced worker with a knowledge of his craft may devise fresh instruments according as his work on actual cases suggests them to him. For there are certain diseases for which the Ancients did not mention any instruments, on account of the variety of them.
Now if the mandible or one of the bones of the mouth be broken or decayed, explore the site with some instrument that is suitable for it, namely one of the instruments or forceps mentioned for extraction of roots. We also make use of forceps of this form.
They are fairly thick, to grip the bone firmly lest it slip before the bone has been got out. Then cicatrize the place with suitable drugs.
If the bone is only slightly decayed, scrape it clean of its decay and blackness, then dress till healed.
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO.
On the sawing-down of teeth growing on top of others.
When teeth grow in other than their natural place the appearance is very bad, specially when it occurs in women or slaves. So you should examine; if the tooth has grown out behind another tooth and it is impossible either to saw or file it down, then extract it. But if it be attached to another tooth, cut it down with an instrument of this kind. It resembles a small chisel and should be of Indian steel with a well-sharpened end.
You should spread your cutting with it over several days on account of the hardness of the tooth and so as to leave the others undisturbed.
If the tooth projects in such a way as to make filing possible, use a file of Indian iron, shaped like this.
It should be wholly manufactured of Indian iron, its handle too, and covered with very fine points to resemble the file used in making needles. You should file the tooth with it very slowly and gently over a period of many days so as not to shift the tooth and cause it to fall out; then finally smooth it and scrape it with one of the scrapers.
If it be a tooth of which part has broken off and it hurts the tongue in speaking, file it down till you have disposed of the roughness of the break and the tooth is smooth and neither injures the tongue nor hinders speech.
CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE.
On interlacing loose teeth with silver or gold wire.
When the front teeth are loosened by some blow or fall and the patient cannot bite upon what he is eating lest they fall out, and you have without avail treated them with styptic medicines, the technique in this case is to bind the teeth with gold or silver wire. Gold is the better, for silver oxidizes and corrodes after some days, but gold remains for ever in its state and does not suffer this change.
The wire should be moderate in thickness in accordance with the distance between the teeth. The method is to take the wire and run it doubled between two sound teeth; then with the two ends of the wire you weave between the loose teeth, either one or several, until you bring your weaving to a sound tooth on the other side; then you repeat your weaving back to the side whence you began; tighten it gently and judiciously till they do not move at all.
You should tie the wire at the root of the teeth lest it slip.
Then with the scissors cut off the two ends of the wire remaining over, and bring them together and twist them with forceps and hide them between a sound tooth and a loose tooth so as to not injure the tongue; then for the future leave them thus bound.
But if it comes undone or breaks, bind them with another wire; so may he have the use of them all his life.
This is a figure of the teeth and the manner of interlacing two sound and two loose teeth, as you see.
After one or two teeth have fallen out they may be restored to their place and bound in as instructed, and become permanent.
This can be done only by an expert and gentle practitioner.
Sometimes a piece of ox-bone may be carved and made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the site where a tooth was lost, and fastened as we have said, and it will last and he will get long service from it.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR.
On incising the ligament below the tongue which is an impediment to speech.
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural and congenital; or it may be accidental, owing to scarring from an injury.
The operation for it is to open the patient's mouth, having his head in your lap, and lift his tongue; then cut that sinew-like ligament transversely till the tongue is freed from its hold.
If it is hard and nodular, arising from scarring after an injury, catch it with a hook and slit it transversely until the ligament is severed and the knots undone.
Beware of making the incision deeply into the flesh, or you may cut an artery there and haemorrhage may occur.
After the cutting, let him rinse with rose-water or vinegar and cold water. Then put under the tongue a pad of linen, which the patient must keep in position at night to prevent the adhesion from forming again.
If there should be haemorrhage, put pounded vitriol on the place; and if bleeding still prevails burn the spot with a lenticular cautery of suitable size and treat in the usual way till healed.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE.
On the removal of 'ranula' beneath the tongue.
Sometimes there occurs under the tongue a swelling resembling a small frog, which hinders the natural movements of the tongue; sometimes it grows so as even to fill the mouth.
The operation for it is to open the patient's mouth in the full light of the sun and inspect the tumour.
If you see that it is dark or black, and hard, and the patient has no sensation in it, do not interfere with it, for it is a cancer.
But if it is inclined to be pale and has fluid in it, put a hook in it and incise it with a fine scalpel and free it all round; and if haemorrhage hinders you while operating apply pounded vitriol to it till the bleeding stops.
Then proceed with your work till all is extracted; then let him rinse his mouth out with vinegar and salt. Then give all the suitable treatment till healed.
CHAPTER THIRTY-six.
On the treatment of swelling of the tonsils and other swellings in the throat.
Sometimes there occur in the throat buboes called 'tonsils', which resemble the buboes occurring externally. When you have employed the remedies described in their own place, without effect, examine, and if the tumour be hard, dark coloured, and devoid of sensation, do not touch it with an instrument.
If it be of a red colour, with a thick root, do not touch this with an instrument either, for fear of a haemorrhage; but let it be till it come to a head; then you may perforate it or let it burst of its own accord.
But if it be pale coloured, round, with a slender pedicle, this is the kind that should be cut.
The operation for this is first to see, before operating, whether his inflamed tumour has already completely subsided or to some extent diminished. Then make the patient sit down in the full light of the sun with his head in your lap; open his mouth; and have an assistant before you to press back the tongue with an instrument like this.
It should be made of bronze or silver, and slender like a knife.
And when the tongue is depressed with its help, the tumour will be made manifest to you and your direct vision will fall upon it. Then take a hook and fix it in one tonsil and pull it forward as far as it will go; but be careful to not pull away with it any of the mucosa.
Then cut it with an instrument of this form; it is like scissors except that its extremities are curved, the beak of each meeting the other, and very sharp.
If you have not this kind of instrument, cut it with a scalpel of this form, on the one side sharp, on the other quite blunt.
And when one tonsil has been cut away, remove the other in exactly the same manner. Then after the excision let the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
But if there occur a haemorrhage let him gargle with water in which have been boiled pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves or similar styptics till the haemorrhage is stanched; then treat till healed.
Sometimes there grow in the fauces tumours other than the tonsils; remove them just as described for tonsils.
I once treated a woman for a tumour that had grown in her throat and was rather dark in colour and had little sensation. It had almost blocked the throat and the woman had only a narrow opening to breathe through, and was quite prevented from eating or drinking, so that she was at death's door, if she had so remained for a day or two.
From the tumour there arose two offshoots, which had eventually emerged through the nostrils.
So I made the utmost haste and, fixing a hook in one of them, drew it forward, and out came a sizeable piece. Then I cut it off where I had hold of it near the nostril. Then I did the same with the one projecting from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and depressed the tongue; then fastened the hook in the tumour itself and cut off a part of it, with only a little haemorrhage; and the woman's pharynx was freed and immediately she had a drink of water, then took some food. And from time to time, for long after, I continued to cut away this tumour. But fresh growth continually replaced what was excised till we both grew weary of it.
Then I went about it astutely and cauterized the tumour high up in the throat, and it stopped growing. Then the woman left the district and I do not know what God has done with her since I had charge of her.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN.
On removal of the tumour of the uvula that is called 'uva'.
When a flux descends to the uvula and it swells and the uvula becomes white and elongated, then it is called 'columella*. And if it should be swollen below and rounded then it is called 'uva'.
When it has been treated as mentioned in its section, and the treatment is unavailing, and you see the inflamed tumour subsiding and the uvula becoming thin, you should amputate it. Now those of them that are bunched up and rounded and not elongated, full of blood, or of a dark colour or black, and without sensation, these you should avoid incising; for this course is dangerous for the patient.
But when you see them as I have described, somewhat pale and elongated, get the patient to sit in the sunlight and depress his tongue with the instrument described above; then take hold of the uva with a hook and draw it down and cut it off with one of the two instruments described for excision of the tonsils.
You should not cut away more than up to the natural limit. For if you cut more off you cause injury to the voice and speech.
Then, after excising, carry on the treatment on the lines described under removal of the tonsils, and treat till healed.
But if the patient flinch from operation, then you must contrive to cauterize it, fearlessly and boldly. The method is to employ a caustic; you put the patient's head in your lap; then, having depressed the tongue with the instrument described above, take some of the corrosive fluid mentioned in the book on cauterization, make it up with quicklime to a medium consistency, and fill with it the hollow in this instrument, whose form is thus.
The end of it where you put the caustic should have a hollow like that of the spoon of a spoonprobe. With the patient lying on his side, letting the mucous secretions flow from his gullet out of his mouth so that none of the corrosive may run down his gullet and cause harm, you place the instrument right on the uvula.
Then, steadying the hand that is holding the medicament, press it out on to the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see the uvula turn black and the corrosive action cease.
If you wish, you can take some cotton wool twisted on the end of a probe, and, having soaked it in the caustic, apply the probe with the wool, down through a cannula till the wool sticks on the uvula. Do this over and over again till you have done all the cauterization you want, then let be; for it will shrink and fall off in three or four days.
If you need to repeat the treatment, do so. After the cauterization, wipe all round the uvula with wool soaked in butter, and with that mop up all the caustic remaining round about it. Then let him rinse his mouth out with cold water and do you treat with external embrocations, and gargles within, till he is well.
This kind of treatment is safer than incision and less to be feared.
Sometimes uva is cured by a method milder than either incision or cautery, namely by means of vapour in the following manner: take pennyroyal and artemisia absinthium and organy and rue and wormwood and chamomile and southernwood and similar herbs and put them all, or some of them, in a pot, cover them with vinegar, and boil them.
The pot should be luted with clay; and there is to be a hole in the middle of the lid to which is fitted a hollow instrument like this, made of silver or bronze, and the end in which is the protuberance should be put in the patient's mouth so that the vapour passes up the tube to the uvula, which becomes of a very dark colour. Do this repeatedly till it sloughs away.
Do this repeatedly till it sloughs away. Be careful not to apply this treatment at the first appearance of the tumour, for often you will aggravate the tumour; but you should do it at the decline of the inflammation.
If you do not have this instrument, take a reed and fit an egg-shell on the end so that the patient's mouth is not burned; for the egg-shell will prevent the heat of the vapour from burning the mouth.
This is a really good and safe treatment.
CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT.
On the extraction of a fish-bone or anything else that sticks in the throat.
There often sticks in the throat a bone or fish-bone or something else.
After you have depressed the tongue with the instrument in the full light of the sun, so that what is stuck in the throat is made as conspicuous as possible, you should then remove whatever can be seen and comes into view.
But when it is not visible to you, and lies hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food in his stomach is digested, for often the object comes out with vomiting. Or let him swallow a piece of turnip or a heart of lettuce or a morsel of dry bread; or take a marine sponge, dry, and tie it on a thread; then let him swallow the sponge and when it reaches where the sharp body is then quickly pull on the thread. Do this a number of times; for often the sharp body or bone will stick to the sponge and will come out.
If it does not come out by the methods described, in this case employ an instrument made of lead, thus.
It should be a little thicker than a probe, with a crook at its extremity.
The patient himself should introduce it into his own throat gently; he should raise the head backwards and take care not to touch the larynx lest coughing be aroused. And let him remove therewith the bone or sharp body.
Or else let the doctor introduce it with his hand (although it is better if the patient himself introduce it, since he knows the site of the obstruction) and push it down and then draw up his hand with the instrument; all this according to the way it presents itself to him, till it is removed.
CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE.
On the removal of a leech sticking in the throat.
When you treat a leech by the medical means spoken of in the appropriate section, with no effect, then inspect the patient's throat in full sunlight after depressing the tongue with the instrument I have described.
If your gaze falls upon the leech, pull it out at once with a small hook or a fine pair of forceps.
But if you cannot get hold of it, take a cannula and introduce it into the patient's mouth near the leech, then pass through the cannula a red-hot iron; do this repeatedly; while the patient must not drink at all that day.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, open his mouth in it and rinse out with it, but let him not swallow a drop of it; and he should keep the movement of the water going by hand time after time; for the leech straightway falls off when it feels the water.
If it does not come away by these means, fumigate the patient's throat with urine or with the juice of asafoetida, using the instrument described for fumigating the uvula.
Do this several times, for then it will fall away.
In fumigating, this is the way to set about it: take a pot containing live coals, fitted with a lid and a hole in the middle of the lid into which is fitted the end of the instrument. Then put in the aromatic; and the patient should apply his mouth to the end of the cannula, with his mouth closed to prevent the escape of the vapour, until he knows that the vapour has reached his throat; for the leech will at once come away.
But if it does not come away, let the inhalation be repeated many times. Let the patient endure his thirst, and eat salty food and garlic and drink no water. It will inevitably be removed by this treatment.
This is the figure of an instrument for extracting the leech from the throat when visible. It resembles forceps, as you see, except that it has this bend for entry into the throat; and the two extremities are shaped like a bird's bill, with the roughness of a file. When they have hold of a thing they do not let go.
CHAPTER FORTY.
A general dissertation on the perforation and incision of tumours.
The kinds of tumour are many and various, as will be mentioned in order in this book.
They differ in the way they are to be perforated or incised, according to two criteria. One is the kind of tumour it is in itself and the humidities it contains.
The other is the part of the body where it occurs. For the tumour occurring in the head is different from the tumour occurring on the posterior, and a tumour occurring in a fleshy part differs from one on the joints; each having its separate category of operation.
There are some tumours that should not be opened till after the pus in them is matured and ripe.
But others should be opened when still raw and immature, such as a tumour near the joints. For when a tumour occurring near a joint lasts long enough to putrefy its surroundings, it often breaks down the ligaments or the tendons of the joint and causes paralysis in the limb. Or if the tumour be near a major organ, if you delay the opening of it until it ripens you will damage that major organ. In the same way, if it be near the anus you must open it, although unripe for opening. The reason why you must open an abscess near the anus while still unripe, before it is brought to a head, is to prevent it from putrefying the cleft and penetrating to the inner part of the anus and becoming a fistula, and incurable.
It is necessary too to know the time to open fully mature swellings: it is when the pain of the swelling is lessened, the fever departs, the redness and the throbbing are reduced, and the head of the abscess becomes wrinkled, with other signs.
The perforation should be made in the lower part of the swelling if possible, so that the pus may more easily drain downwards; or else in the thinnest and most swollen part of the swelling.
Your incision should be longitudinal if the swellings are in such places as hands or feet or in the site of joints, tendons, nerves, or arteries; and, in short, in all flat places where there is no curvature. In curved places let the perforation proceed according to the place.
But when the swelling is in the fleshy parts it is best to leave the perforation, as we have said, until it is fully matured. For if you perforate it prematurely the sanious discharge will go on longer and will be excessively foul; and often both the edges and the depths of the opening will become indurated.
Some swellings are perforated latitudinally if necessary, or having regard to the requirement of the part.
In small swellings you should use a single perforation; while in large ones you should use wide or multiple perforations according to the size of the swelling.
There are also some swellings that need a circular incision of the skin, and should be cut when they have become like a rag, and necrosed —which actually happens often in abscesses and sinuses.
And there are some that should be incised triangularly; and others with an incision of myrtle-leaf form; e.g. a tumour on the groin.
There are others again to which should be applied circular and lunate and similar incisions.
Those that have no head, such as the smooth and flat ones, should be incised with only a simple perforation.
When a swelling is large and has collected a large quantity of pus, and you perforate it, do not be in a hurry to get it all out at once; but get some of it out and then bandage it till another day; then again remove part of the pus; and so do, again and again, gradually, till it is all got out.
This particularly applies if the patient be in a weak state, or a pregnant woman, or a baby, or a decrepit old man; for the animal spirit is very often dissolved with the sudden evacuation of the pus, and the patient dies unexpectedly.
Be very careful therefore, with this sort. Then, after you have opened the tumour, you should cleanse the wound and consider: if the tumour has only a small opening, or it is one simple incision, employ swabs of lint or cotton wool; but if it is a large tumour with multiple incisions, introduce a swab into each incision so that they meet.
And if the tumour was such that you cut away a part of the skin, or sliced the tumour, you will need to pack it with cotton wool or plucked linen, dry; and bandage until the third day. Then remove it and treat with the needful ointments until healed.
If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, use cold water and vinegar, soaking a lint rag in both and frequently applying it to the place.
And if the bleeding still persists then it is necessary to employ the method and the treatment and the powders that we have prescribed in many parts of this book and in their own sections.
Now if this should be in winter and the site of the tumour abound in nerves, you should have some pads soaked in hot wine and oil and then apply to the place.
But if it be in summer and the parts be fleshy, apply the pads soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, all being cold, till the third day, as we have said. Then unbandage the tumour and wipe it and give it the treatment suitable to it, until cured.
This is the information you need about the treatment of tumours in general. As for the particulars, I now review the way to treat each tumour, by chapters, in detail.
CHAPTER FORTY-ONE.
On opening superficial tumours of the scalp.
Small swellings form in the scalp, which are of the various kinds of cyst, contained within membranes which form a capsule to them like the crop of a chicken. There are many kinds of these.
There are fatty ones, there are those containing a liquid resembling black slime, there are those containing a liquid resembling porridge and gruel and the like, while others are stony hard.
It is not dangerous to open and extract any of them, so long as you do not encounter an artery in excising them.
The operation for incising them begins by exploring them with the instrument called an explorer, figured lower down, so as to get to know what sort of contents they have.
If they are the sort that contain fluid, incise them with a simple longitudinal incision, thus.
Begin your incision at the letter b, to letter g; and when the humidity is emptied dissect away the capsule containing it, whole, not leaving the least remnant. For often it comes back if any has been left behind.
Then dip some cotton wool in Egyptian ointment if you have some; if not, in saline; and pack it in the wound and leave till next day, for that will destroy the remains of the capsule.
Then repeat the cotton wool with Egyptian ointment a second time, or a third if need be, till it is certain there is nothing of the cyst left. Then treat the wound with ointments until healed.
If the tumour contains a fatty cyst, incise thus, a cruciform incision; then hook up the edges of the incision, dissect away every direction, and strive to extract the containing capsule.
If you should come across an artery, deal with it in the manner already described.
Carry out the same manner of incision and treatment for a stony tumour, just as I have described. It is easier to open a hard tumour, for it has little blood and humidity; and sometimes these tumours on some people's heads have no humidity at all.
I myself cut down upon a tumour in the head of an elderly woman and I found the tumour as hard as a stone, rough and white, which it was impossible to break, and which if thrown at anyone would have injured him.
For all tumours arising in the head other than these, such as those which occur in children's heads and those at the root of the ear, make a simple incision.
You should always begin your incision from below to allow an easy downward flow for the pus.
Then treat with suitable after-treatment.
CHAPTER FORTY-TWO.
On the incision of scrofulous glands in the neck.
Tumours of this kind often occur in the neck and in the axilla and in the groin; and sometimes in other parts of the body.
Those occurring in the neck are sometimes single and sometimes multiple, one arising from another; and each scrofula is contained in a capsule of its own, like the cysts and tumours of the head that we have described.
There are many kinds of these glands; some are stony, some contain humidities, some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
But those that you find by touch to be benign and are of a colour not greatly differing from the skin, freely movable in any direction, not adherent to the nerves of the neck nor to a jugular vein, nor to an artery, and are not deep-lying; these should be incised with a simple incision from above downwards, from line g to line b and dissect away all round and draw the edges of the skin apart with one or two hooks or with several if necessary, as we said on the subject of tumours of the head, and draw them out very slowly.
Be most careful not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve.
The scalpel should not be over sharp lest you make the incision too big, or the patient flinches and so you cut open that which does not need cutting. If you cut a vein or artery and be thus hindered in your operating, apply powdered vitriol or some styptic powder to the wound, and bandage the wound and let be till the worst of the swelling has subsided and the opening is relaxed and threatens to turn purulent; for then the bleeding will stop.
Then return to your operation and finish it.
Then feel with your forefinger to see if there are any small glands left, in which case dissect and clean them away.
If there is a large blood-vessel at the root of the gland, then you should not cut that gland at its root but should ligature it with a strong double ligature and leave it till it sloughs away of its own accord without harm.
Then pack the wound with cotton wool previously soaked in Egyptian ointment; then continue dressing.
If you excise the whole gland, you should at once draw together the two edges of the wound and suture them, when you are absolutely certain there is nothing of it left.
But if you see that, on account of the size of the scrofula, there is still some superfluity left behind, you should carry the incision to the root and base of it, and employ suturing and the rest of the remedies mentioned.
The glands that contain humidities you should open with a single perforation where they seem to have matured; make your perforation from below, as we have said.
Then after opening use swabs soaked in Egyptian and similar ointments to do away with the unhealthy remains, till you see that the wound is clean; then dress with nourishing ointments until healed.
CHAPTER FORTY-THREE.
On incising the larynx for a tumour arising in the throat.
The Ancients mentioned this laryngeal incision, but I have not seen anyone in our parts who has done it.
Now here is the gist of what they say.
Incision should be avoided in those suffering from quinsy, for they will not benefit from it, since all the passages and the lung will be diseased.
But in those with an abscess in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, and when there is no disease in the windpipe itself, you must employ laryngotomy to avoid the mischief of suffocation.
Now when we wish to undertake this we should incise the larynx under the third or fourth ring of the windpipe with a small incision transversely between two rings, so that the incision may be through the membrane, not the cartilage. This spot is suitable for incision, for it is deficient in flesh, and there are no blood-vessels near.
If the practitioner be nervous, he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then cut down through the skin till he reach the windpipe, and avoid blood-vessels if he see any.
Then let him incise the membrane which we have spoken of. You can be certain of having opened the trachea by the emission of phlegm when it is pierced, and by the loss of voice.
Then leave the wound open for some while.
When the danger of suffocation is passed, bring the two lips of the wound together by the skin, which alone must be sutured, without the cartilage.
Then use medicaments stimulating granulation till healed.
The author of this book says, the interpretation of this account that we have given is this: when they see that one of the tumours that they mention has obstructed the patient's throat and he is approaching death and is anxious himself to be incised, they resort to laryngotomy so that the patient may breathe somewhat through the wound and his life be saved.
They bid leaving the wound open till the worst of the disease abates; its height will last about three days; then they bid sew up the wound and dress till healed.
My own experience was this: a slave-girl seized a knife and buried it in her throat and cut part of the trachea; and I was called to attend her. I found her bellowing like a sacrifice that has had its throat cut.
So I laid the wound bare and found that only a little haemorrhage had come from it; and I assured myself that neither the jugular vein nor an artery had been cut, but air passed out through the wound. So I hurriedly sutured the wound and dressed it until healed.
And no ill befell the maid except for a hoarseness in the voice, but nothing more; and after some days she was restored to the best of health.
Hence we may say that laryngotomy is not dangerous.
CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR.
On cutting down upon the tumour which occurs on the outside of the throat, and is called 'Elephant of the throat'.
This tumour which is called 'Elephant of the throat' is a large tumour of the colour of the body; it commonly occurs in women.
It is of two kinds, congenital and acquired.
As to the congenital, there is no treatment for it.
The acquired is of two kinds: one resembles a sebaceous cyst, the other resembles the tumour arising from an arterial aneurysm, and it is dangerous to incise it, so on no account must you apply a knife to the latter kind, except any that are small; if you try and explore them with a probe and you find they are like sebaceous cysts and not adherent to any blood-vessel, then immediately cut down upon them as you would a cyst and remove them with whatever capsule may surround them, if they are contained within a capsule; and if not, dissect away the whole accurately; then treat the place with suitable remedies.
CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE.
On incision for various kinds of cyst.
There are various kinds of cyst. We have already mentioned all their varieties in the proper place.
But we need here to set forth the difference between a cyst and an abscess, for it is complicated.
The abscess will be accompanied by heat and fever and fearsome pain, until the boiling-up of the superfluous matter settles down and the suppurating process is completed: then will the fever and intensity subside.
But with a cyst there is neither heat nor fever nor pains, and a membranous capsule encloses it, its own particular covering.
The cyst is flesh-coloured, and it begins like a pea and becomes like a melon, more or less; and is of two kinds: either fatty or containing humidity; and the colours of the humidities are several, as we mentioned in the appropriate section.
When you come to treat the cyst, you should first sound it and examine it with the instrument called the explorer, which is figured in the next chapter.
The way to examine all tumours and cysts is to take this instrument and press it in at the spot where the tumour is softest, and revolve it gently with your fingers till you know you have pierced the skin; then press it in proportionately to the size of the tumour.
Then remove the explorer and see what comes out after it.
If a humidity should flow, whatever the colour, make a simple incision, as I said for the other tumours.
But if no humidity come out along the track of the explorer you know at once that it is fatty.
Therefore make a cruciform incision upon it in this shape, as I have told you, and attach hooks and dissect away the skin gently from all sides. Be careful with the capsule; if you can, get it out whole, together with the cyst.
But if the capsule is torn in the course of the operation, and you cannot get it out whole, which frequently happens, remove it bit by bit until there is none of it left.
For if a part of it is left behind, either great or small, the cyst will generally return.
If it defeats you and some little piece of it remain, pack the wound, when you have done all you can, with some caustic powder and bandage it and put on it something to ease the inflamed tumour, and treat in the usual way until healed.
If the tumour be large, sew the edges of the incision together and treat with stimulants.
If you should come across a blood-vessel, pulsating or not, and there be haemorrhage, hasten to pack it with pounded vitriol; and leave bandaged for two or three days until the wound becomes purulent and the boiling-up of the blood is allayed; then resume cutting open the rest of the cyst.
CHAPTER FORTY-SIX.
On the shapes of the instruments used for incising and perforating.
Among these are the various explorers. There are three varieties of this instrument, large, medium, and small.
This is the figure of the large explorer.
Figure of the small explorer.
They should all be made of the best Damascene steel, with quadrangular points, and strong, to assist entry into the tumours.
And this is the shape of the probes; they are also called burud.
There are three kinds of this, too: large, medium, and small.
Figure of the large probe.
Figure of the medium probe.
Figure of the small probe.
They are suitable for exploring tumours, wounds, fistulas, and sinuses, to see what is inside them such as bones, etc.
They are made round, polished, and smooth, like packing-needles, of Chinese copper or of white copper, or of brass, silver, or iron. The best are those made of white copper.
Sometimes probes are made of black lead, for investigating fistulas whose deeper course is devious; so that by reason of their softness they can adapt themselves to the curves.
Of these, too, there are three varieties: the long, the medium, and the short, proportioned to the requirement of the depth of every fistula.
The large lead probe.
The medium lead probe.
The small lead probe.*
There are many kinds of hook. For example, there are the simple hooks, that is, having only one prong; there are three kinds of this: large, medium, and small.
And there are the hooks provided with two prongs, of which there are three kinds.
And there are the bent hooks with two prongs, of which there are three kinds.
And there are the hooks provided with three prongs, of which there are three kinds.
All of these kinds are necessary in their place.
The large, medium, and small simple hook.
The large and medium blind hooks. The small blind hook. The large, medium, and small, double-pronged hooks
The large triple-pronged hook.
The medium, and small triplepronged hooks.
These are the figures of the scarifying scalpels with which you incise and dissect away cysts and tumours. They too are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Figure of the large scarifying scalpel.
Figure of the medium scarifying scalpel.
Figure of the small scarifying scalpel.
The cutting edges should be sharp, and the other ends blunt. The reason for making them like this is so that they can be utilized in dissecting away cysts where there is a fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and also that the patient may console himself thereby and find some small relief from the pain involved in the dissection of a tumour.
Here are the figures of the 'deceivers' of which also there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
They are made of brass and resemble the rod for instilling eye-salve.
At one end there is the likeness of a broad spoon made of two plates, in the extremity of which is the point of a hidden scalpel; thus the knife is masked like a bird's tongue, moving in and out at will, as you see.
Figures of the scalpels which are hidden between the fingers when tumours are to be opened, so that they are not noticed by the patient. They are of three varieties: large, medium, and small.
Figures of the cupping vessels with which haemorrhage is stanched. There are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
They are made of bronze or of Chinese alloy, round but slightly elongated, as you see, and also rather thin.
You should have these kinds by you, large and small, so that haemorrhage may be quickly stopped in an emergency and when you have no medicine.
But they are not to be used for suppressing haemorrhage in all parts of the body, but only in the fleshy parts such as the calf and thigh muscles, the arm muscles, the breasts, belly, and groin, and other similar fleshy soft parts.
Sometimes of this class small instruments, like nutshells, are made, like this. Haemorrhage from a venesection is stopped by these; or in the case of a cut artery or vein.
Sometimes round ones are made, like this.
CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN.
On the treatment of the male breast when it resembles the female.
The breasts of some males may swell on attaining puberty so as to resemble the female breast, and they remain permanently swollen and ugly.
If this is abhorrent, a semicircular incision should be made on the breast, like this figure, from b to g. Then dissect away all the fatty tissue and pack the wound with a cicatrizing compound and sew the lips together and dress until healed.
But if the breast is pendulous and flabby on account of its size, as happens with women, you should make two semicircular incisions on the upper side, the ends joining one another, in such wise that the longer incision encircles the other like this, from b to g. Then dissect away the skin between the two incisions and remove the fat and sew up as we have described; and apply styptic powder and the necessary dressings until healed.
But if you cannot make the incision as full and perfect as it ought to have been, because the patient is restless, or because haemorrhage arises, you should pack the wound with cotton wool soaked in corrosive ointment and leave till it eats away the remainder of the fat; then dress until healed.
CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT.
On the opening of axillary tumours.
These tumours under the armpit are of the type of scrofulous tumours, hard, enclosed in a capsule.
Some contain humidity. Those that contain humidity should be opened with a semicircular incision like this, from b to g. When you have removed all the pus that had been in the tumour, pack the wound with teased-out cotton wool and leave till another day.
Then remove the cotton wool and dress with a suitable ointment until healed.
If the tumour be of the nodular scrofulous kind, cut directly down on it just as we prescribed for that kind.
If the wound continue to discharge pus, apply the cautery to it as prescribed before.
CHAPTER FORTY-NINE.
On opening a tumour arising from a bloodvessel, called an aneurysm.
When an artery is injured and the overlying skin scars, a tumour very often arises from this; the same thing happens to a vein: a swelling and a tumour. And these are the signs by which you may diagnose whether the swelling and tumour arise from an artery or a vein: if it be from an artery the tumour will be a deep and elongated mass; and when you press upon it with your finger there will be a feeling of pulsation.
But if it arises from a vein the swelling will be circular and superficial.
It is dangerous to make an incision on tumours of this kind, specially in the axilla, the groin, the neck, and in many other parts of the body; it is indeed highly dangerous, so in these you must avoid treatment by the knife; also in those in the limbs and in the head it must be avoided.
But any such that arises from the inflation of the mouth of an artery, you may cut down in the skin over that with a longitudinal incision; then open up your incision with hooks and dissect away the artery, freeing it from the tissues till it is laid bare.
Then run a needle beneath the artery to reach the other side, and tie the artery in two places with a double thread, as I showed you for the extraction of the temporal arteries.
Then with the scalpel prick the part between the two ligatures to let out all the blood and get the tumour down.
Then apply dressings to excite suppuration until the ligatures fall away; then dress with suitable ointments until healed.
If the swelling be due to a vein that has been penetrated, you should gather up with your hand as much of the tumour as you can, together with the skin; then pass a needle beneath the place which you have grasped in your hand and run it through, threaded with a double thread, until it emerges at the other side; then with it tie a strong ligature round the swelling as I mentioned to you on ligaturing the swollen uvula, from either side, with the ends of the thread.
If you fear that the threads may come loose, pass a second needle and thread beneath the whole tumour to intersect with the passage of the first needle; and tie your threads in four places.
Then incise the tumour in the centre to extract the contents. Then cut away the superfluous skin and leave what has been ligatured.
Then put on that a pad previously soaked in wine and oil; then apply the treatment with lint and ointments until healed.
CHAPTER FIFTY. On the tumour arising from the twisting of a tendon.
As a tumour arises on an artery or a vein, so may it also come in a tendon when it has been bruised; or it may arise from excessive fatigue, or such causes.
This occurs mostly at the wrists, at the heel, and at all sites of articular movement.
It is a hard tumour of the same colour as the rest of the body, and is generally painless, and when strong pressure is put upon it the patient has a numb feeling in it.
It is a tumour that does not form in the deeper tissues but is subcutaneous. It is freely movable laterally, but will not go forward or backward.
Those that are situated on joints should certainly not be tackled with the knife, for that often causes palsy.
Incise the skin of those occurring on the head or forehead, and if the tumour be small take hold of it with the forceps and cut it away by the root.
But if it be large, catch it up with a hook and dissect it away and remove it; and sew up the incision and dress until healed.
CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE.
On the amputation of warts occurring on the belly.
Some people often get warts on the belly and on the rest of the body, called fungous warts, because of their resemblance to fungi. They have a slender pedicle and a broad head, the edges of which are sometimes inverted ; and some are small, whereas others of them grow very big.
I myself once saw a man who had two warts on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else; they were white and had thin pedicles.
Their edges were inverted and had split open, and a humour flowed continually from them.
I amputated them both and weighed them: one came to about eighteen ounces, and the other six ounces.
This is the operation for amputating them: examine the patient carefully, and if he be of a humid temperament and the colour of the warts be white, and if they are soft, with a thin stalk, amputate them with a broad scalpel. But you should also have at hand cauteries in a fire; for often in amputating them there is much haemorrhage. So, if the bleeding be a hindrance to you, be quick and cauterize them.
So, if the bleeding be a hindrance to you, be quick and cauterize them. On the other hand if you see that the patient is frightened and dreads the cutting of them with the scalpel, take a wire of stout lead, and ligature this type of wart and leave for two days.
Then increase the stricture by the lead wire and go on doing this as it sinks into the wart, until the wart is cut through and spontaneously falls away with no trouble.
But if the warts have stout pedicles there is some risk and fear in the cutting of them, especially those that occur on the belly.
Sometimes, however, you can cut away the half, or some part, and then cauterize to prevent recurrence.
Then dress until the wound is healed.
But beware of trying to cut away growths that are dark in colour, with little sensation and hideous in appearance, for they are cancerous tumours.
I shall soon be mentioning cancer.
CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO.
On the treatment of protruding navel.
The navel becomes prominent from many causes; either from a rupture of the peritoneum over the abdomen, so that omentum or intestine comes through it as in other ruptures; or from blood extravasation from an artery or vein, as we have mentioned; or else from wind trapped in it.
If it be due to ruptured peritoneum and protruding omentum, the colour of the tumour will be the same as the rest of the body; it will be soft and painless and will seem to change its position; But if it be due to an escape of bowel the change of position, compared with what we have described, will be greater, and it will disappear on digital pressure, and then will recur; and often there will be crepitus with it, and it will increase in size on entering the bath or on violent exertion.
If it be due to fluid, it will be soft and will not disappear on manual pressure, nor will it grow larger or smaller.
If it be due to blood, then in addition to these signs the tumour will appear blackish.
If it arise from a fleshy overgrowth, the tumour will be solid and hard, remaining always constant in bulk.
If it be due to wind, it will be soft to the touch.
The operation for these is to examine, and if the exomphalos be due to arterial or venous blood, or wind, you should withhold treatment since it is dangerous in these cases, with an uncertain outlook, as I taught you in the chapter on tumours arising from an artery or vein.
But if it be due to bowel or omentum, bid the patient hold his breath and stand stiffly upright; then make an ink mark all round the umbilicus; then tell him to lie on his back before you; then with a broad scalpel cut all round the umbilicus along the line marked out; then draw up the middle of the tumour with a large hook; then ligature the site of the incision with a strong thread or silk cord, tying it securely with a slip-knot.
Then open the middle of the tied tumour above the ligature and insert your forefinger and search for the bowel; and if you find it caught in the ligature slacken the slip-knot and push the bowel back into the abdomen.
But if you find omentum, stretch it with a hook and cut off what is superfluous.
And if you come across an artery or vein, tie it securely and go on with your work: take two needles and thread them with two strong threads and insert the two needles into the incision that you have made around the tumour, pushing them in so that they cross one another. Then ligature the tumour in four places over the needles.
If you wish, you may remove the needles and let be until the ligatured tissue necroses and falls away of its own accord; or cut it away when it is thin and necrosing. Then dress with the needful ointments until healed.
But if the prominent navel be due to an overgrowth of flesh there or from humidity, you should slice the tumour as we have said and get out all the blood or humidity to be found there. Then dress it with stimulating dressings.
CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have spoken, in the relevant section, of the kinds of cancer and of the way in which medical treatment of them is to be attempted; with a warning against treatment by the knife lest they ulcerate. We also mentioned the cancer arising in the uterus and gave a warning against its treatment.
The Ancients said that when a cancer is in a site where total eradication is possible, such as a cancer of the breast or of the thigh, and in similar parts where complete removal is possible, and especially when in the early stage and small, (then surgery was to be tried).
But when it is of long standing and large you should leave it alone. For I myself have never been able to cure any such, nor have I seen anyone else succeed before me.
The procedure in a case amenable to treatment, as we have said, is first for the patient to be purged several times from black bile; then bleed him if his veins seem full.
Then put the patient in the most convenient position for operating. Then attach to the tumour hooks suited to it; then make a circular incision all round to include the skin with the utmost thoroughness so that not the least root of it remains; let the blood flow and do not stanch it quickly; but put pressure upon the place and squeeze out all the thick blood, either by hand or with any instrument you can.
If in operating you get a very severe haemorrhage from cutting an artery or vein, cauterize the vessel until the bleeding stops; then dress in the usual way until healed.
CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have mentioned in the section the kinds of hydrops, and the manner in which the fluid collects; the signs of each kind; and the medical treatment of them.
The only kind which is to be treated by operation is the one called 'ascites'. But neither the kind called 'tympanites' nor general anasarca are to be treated by operation at all, for that would be fatal.
When you have been trying medical treatment for this kind, for ascites, and your treatment is ineffectual, then consider; and if the patient be in a low state or suffer from other disease beside the ascites, such as cough or diarrhoea or some such, then beware of attempting operative treatment since it will be of uncertain outcome.
But if you see that the patient has plenty of strength and suffers under no other complaint beside the dropsy, and is of neither tender nor advanced age, then the operative procedure in this case is for you to place the patient, standing, before you, with an assistant behind him to apply manual pressure to his abdomen and push the fluid down into the pelvis.
Then take a pointed scalpel of this shape, sharp along both sides, long, and very sharp at the end like a scalpel, but slightly stubby so that in operating you do not reach the intestines and damage them.
Then consider; and if the dropsy arises from the region of the intestines then you should make an incision three fingers' breadth directly below the umbilicus, above the pubes.
If the dropsy arises from disease of the liver, let your incision be three fingers to the left of the umbilicus.
If it arises from disease of the spleen, let the incision be three fingers to the right.
Moreover, the incision must not be on the side which the patient wishes to lie on, so that the superfluities may not flow to the damaged part.
Then pierce the skin with the instrument, introduce the instrument into that incision, and bring the scalpel up between the skin and the membrane, as if excoriating, over an area about the size of a fingernail.
Then pierce through the membrane till the scalpel reaches a cavity, which will be where the water is; then withdraw the scalpel and put into the opening the instrument shaped like this; it resembles a fine section of reed, made of silver, bronze or white copper; smooth and well polished, with a small opening at the lower end and three at the sides, two on one side and one on the other, as you see. Its extremity may be cut to the shape of a writing reed like this; the upper end of it is supplied with a ring.
Its extremity may be cut to the shape of a writing reed like this; the upper end of it is supplied with a ring. When the instrument reaches the fluid, the fluid will at once pass down into it. Evacuate at one time only a moderate amount of fluid; for if you evacuate more than you should at a time, the patient may die through a dissolution of his animal spirits, or he will undergo a fainting that is next door to death.
But let out such quantity of fluid as is proportionate to his strength and as is indicated to you by the patient's condition: the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his colour.
Then withdraw the instrument and keep (the rest of) the fluid in. For it will be immediately held back by the skin that closes the opening in the peritoneum, which, as I have told you, must be perforated in that manner.
Then repeat the use of the instrument another day if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and withdraw again a small quantity of fluid. And do this daily, watchful and on guard against error, until there is only a trace of fluid left.
But if you are afraid for the patient and leave a large amount of fluids treat him by burying him in hot sand, and by heavy sweating in the bath and in the sun, and letting him go thirsty; while you treat him with drying medicines, till he is well.
He should also be cauterized on the abdomen and on the liver and spleen after the paracentesis, as I have previously described.
CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE.
On the treatment of boys born with imperforate urinary meatus; or with the meatus small or not in the proper place.
Sometimes a boy is born from his mother's womb with the glans penis not perforate.
So at the moment of his birth you should be quick and make a perforation with a fine scalpel figured thus.
Then put in the opening a slender leaden sound, tie it and keep it in for three or four days.
When he wishes to make water, it will be removed and he will do so; then put it back.
If you do not put in the leaden sound it may be that the urine passing through the place will prevent the wound from healing.
The case having too narrow a meatus should be treated with the leaden sound, as we have said, for many days until it is wide enough.
In those cases having a misplaced meatus—for example, there are some born with the opening at the edge of the glans so that they cannot make water forwards until the opening of the penis is lifted up by hand, nor can they beget, since the semen cannot reach directly to the uterus, a disorder which is very ugly.
The manner of operating in this case is for the patient to lie back; then with your left hand draw out his glans firmly and cut the end of the glans at the place of the meatus with a broad knife or sharp scalpel, as if sharpening a pen, or as if you were whittling something, so that the middle of it protrudes like a glans penis and the opening falls in the middle as it should.
And beware, in your operating, of haemorrhage, which often happens; meet it with styptics and dress the wound until it heals.
CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX.
On pustules occurring on the prepuce and on the glans; and blackness and necrosis and adhesions between glans and prepuce.
These pustules very frequently occur in the urinary meatus and are excrescences of foul tissue.
Some are malignant and some are not.
The nonmalignant you should seize with a fine hook and pare away until they are altogether gone; then apply to the place cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then afterwards dress with Palm ointment until healed.
But when the pustules are malignant, of a dirty colour, for these you should employ the cautery after cutting and scraping them.
If the pustules be on the prepuce of an uncircumcized unbeliever and there are some inside the prepuce and some outside, those that are inside should be removed first; and when they are healed over, then treat those outside. For if you deal with both at the same time you are in danger of going through the prepuce.
Sometimes there occurs a blackness and necrosis in the testicles and prepuce; then you should scrape away all the black part which looks ready to go necrotic or has already necrosed. Then afterwards smear on the place honey with pounded and sifted pomegranate peel and bitter vetch.
Then carry on with the usual treatment until healed.
If haemorrhage set in, cauterize with a lunate cautery figured thus.
For the cautery serves a twofold purpose, namely against haemorrhage and for a putrefying wound.
If at any time the penis mortifies and goes entirely, you should pass into the urethra a leaden cannula so that the patient can make water.
As to the adhesion of the glans to the prepuce (which occurs in him who has his prepuce intact, being under no obligation to be circumcized; sometimes too adhesion may occur by reason of a wound or an abscess) you should scrape it with a flat-nosed scalpel until the adhesion is divided and the glans penis is freed all round from the prepuce.
But if the complete separation of the two be difficult then you should dissect away a little of the glans and of the prepuce; for the prepuce is thin, and consequently it is often pierced quickly.
Separate then between the glans and the prepuce with a piece of fine linen dipped in cold water to prevent further adhesions.
Then let it be dressed with some styptic wine till it heals over.
CHAPTER FIFTY-SEVEN.
On the circumcision of boys; and the correction of their erroneous treatment.
Circumcision is nothing but a solution of continuity like other wounds: but as it is a result of our deliberate action, and as it is done particularly to boys, we should plan in this case the very best operation, and the easiest way that leads to safety.
Now the Ancients made no mention of circumcision in any of their books, since it was not practised in their religion; but it is something we have acquired by experience. I have myself seen the common run of practitioners and barbers carry it out with razor and with scissors; they use a spindle-whorl, a ligature of thread, and incision by means of the finger-nail.
I have personally tried all these ways and have not found a better than circumcision with scissors and a thread ligature. For circumcision carried out with the razor is often eluded by the skin; for the skin of the prepuce is of two layers; and often the outer skin is incised and the inner is left intact, so that a second incision is needed, and renewed pain; while when the circumcision is done with a spindle-whorl you are in danger of cutting the tip of the penis, since the tip often goes into the aperture of the whorl.
As for circumcision by the finger-nail, the nail will often slip off the skin and your operation be spoilt; or the boy's foreskin may be naturally short, for many are born thus, not needing circumcision. I have seen this myself.
Experience has taught me the superiority of circumcision with the scissors and the thread ligature. For scissors cut evenly, since the upper edge of the scissors is exactly the same as the lower edge; and so, as you compress your hand, thanks to the correspondence of the two blades you cut equally and simultaneously; and you make the girdle of the thread like a wall all round the skin of the tip of the penis: thus no error can occur.
The manner of operating is first to make the boy, especially if he is one who understands a little, imagine that all you are going to do is tie a ligature on the tip of the penis and leave it for another day.
Then amuse him and cheer him as much as you can, according to his intelligence; then stand him upright before you, not sitting; and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot and do not let the boy's eye chance upon that or any other instrument.
Then with your hand take hold of the tip of the penis, blow into the foreskin, and draw it back till the glans penis is exposed; then cleanse from it all unclean matter that has collected.
This is the type of scissors most suitable for circumcizing.
They should be fiat-nosed, sharp, with no bend in them, and with the pivot tempered ; and the length of the handles should be equal to that of the blades.
Now the mistake often occurring in circumcision is for the inner layer of skin, either the whole or the part, to be inverted at the cutting.
So you should at the start draw it out with your finger-nail before the place swell; then make an even incision.
And if you are unable to get a hold with your finger-nail then pick it up with a hook and make your incision.
If after three days there still remains some inflation and swelling of the part below the tip of the penis, let it be until the effusion subsides, and then gently peel it away and cut it as best you may.
Be careful of the tip of the penis; though if any of the tip is cut away that will do no harm.
And dress the wound with stimulating medicaments from among the powders that we described in the treatise on powders.
Should more of the skin be cut away than necessary and the skin is wrinkled up, that will do no great harm either.
Continue such treatment as we have mentioned, until healed.
CHAPTER FIFTY-EIGHT.
On the treatment of retention of urine.
Retention of the urine is caused by an obstruction, from a stone or a clot of blood or pus or a fleshy tumour, or similar cause.
But if these measures do not free it and the matter is very urgent with the patient, then you should attempt to bring it out with the instrument called a catheter, of which this is the figure. It is made of silver, slender and smooth and hollow like the quill of a bird's feather; as slender as a probe; about a span and a half in length; and with a tiny funnel at the end.
This is the manner in which you draw off the urine through it: take a double thread and with a strong knot tie a little wool or cotton on the end, introduce the end of the thread into the lower end of the catheter, and trim off with scissors any superfluous wool, so that it will go into the tube and close it like a tassel. Then smear the catheter with oil or butter or egg-white.
Make the patient sit down; then anoint the bladder and the meatus of the penis with humid oils or with olive-oil and warm water.
Then gently introduce the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra. Then turn the end of the penis upward toward the umbilicus; then push the catheter inwards until the curve of the catheter ends, and push the catheter in until it reaches nearly to the seat. Then turn the penis down, with the catheter in it, and push until it reaches the bladder, and the patient now feels that it has entered a hollow.
Then withdraw rather firmly the thread with the wool plug attached, for the urine follows the wool; then pull it right out and the urine will pour out.
Apply the catheter again and again until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
CHAPTER FIFTY-NINE.
On the manner of irrigating the bladder with a syringe, and the forms of the instruments that serve for that.
When there occurs an ulcer in the bladder, or there is a clot of blood or a deposit of pus in it, and you wish to instil into it lotions and medicaments, this is done with the help of an instrument called a syringe.
It is made of silver or ivory, hollow, with a long fine tube, fine as a probe; entirely hollow except for the end, which is solid with three holes in it: two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
The hollow part containing the plunger is exactly of a size to be closed by it, so that any liquid is drawn up with it when you pull it up; and when you press it down it is driven in a jet, as is done by the projector whereby naphtha is thrown in naval battles.
So when you wish to inject fluid into the bladder, dip the end of the syringe into the fluid and draw up the piston, for the fluid will be drawn up into the cavity of the syringe.
Then introduce the end into the urethra as we described for catheterization; then expel the fluid by means of the piston; the fluid will immediately flow into the bladder and the patient will have a sense of its entry.
This is the illustration of a fine clyster also for irrigation of the bladder.
It is made of silver or white copper. The upper part of it is like a small funnel and beneath it is a groove where falls the thread of the ligature.
Then take a camel's bladder and fill it with whatever fluid you wish to wash the bladder out with, and tie it to the syringe with a strong ligature of double thread between the two ridges.
Warm the fluid a little over the fire; then introduce the end of the siphon into the end of the urinary meatus.
Then apply strong pressure to the bladder containing the fluid until the patient can feel the fluid has entered his own bladder.
But if you have not a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and cut out a circle; then make holes in the edge all round the circle; then pass a strong ligature through these holes all round and draw the circle in, as a bag is closed with a draw-string, first putting into it whatever fluid, oil, or water, you desire.
Then tie it to the instrument and do with it as with the camel's bladder, squeezing until the fluid reaches the bladder of the patient.
CHAPTER SIXTY.
On the extraction of the stone.
We have already in the due place reviewed the different kinds of stone and the medical treatment of them. I mentioned too the difference between stones arising in the kidney and those arising in the bladder, and gave all the symptoms of them.
I also mentioned the kind of stone to which manipulation and incision are appropriate.
This is in particular the stone arising in the bladder, and the sort impacted in the urethra.
I shall now give a short description of this with a clear explanation and summary.
Now I say that a vesical calculus most frequently occurs in boys. Among the symptoms is that the urine passed out of the bladder is of a thin consistency like water, and sand appears in it; and the patient keeps on rubbing and playing with his penis; and often it hangs flaccid and then is erected; at the same time many of them get a prolapse of the rectum.
The cure of boys under the age of fourteen years is easy; but the treatment of old people is difficult; and that of young men midway between the two.
And the larger the stone the easier the cure; with a small stone the cure is otherwise.
When we undertake treatment the patient must first have an enema to empty his bowel completely; for sometimes the faeces prevent the calculus being found when it is looked for.
Then the patient should be taken by the feet and jarred to and fro and shaken downwards to bring the calculus down into the neck of the bladder; or else let him jump down from a height a number of times.
Then have him sit down upright before you with his hands beneath his thighs, to make the whole bladder incline downwards.
Then examine him and palpate him externally.
If you feel the stone in the empty place, immediately hasten and cut down upon it.
But if there is not the slightest sign of it to the touch then you should anoint with oil the forefinger of your left hand if it be a boy, or the middle finger if it be a fully grown young man, and introduce it into the anus and search around for the calculus, until, when it comes under the finger, you can work it slowly towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards toward the place where you wish to make your incision.
And bid an assistant squeeze the bladder with his hand; and bid another assistant raise the scrotum with his left hand and with the other hand stretch the skin under the testicles away from the place where the incision is going to be.
Then do you take a lancet like this and make your incision in the space between the anus and the testicles, not in the mid-line but on the side of the left buttock; and cut down upon the calculus itself, keeping your finger in the anus and pressing it outwards. The incision should be oblique, wide externally and narrowing inwards down to dimensions allowing the exit of the stone, not larger. Now you may press with the finger that is in the anus upon the stone as you make the incision, and it comes out without difficulty.
You should know that sometimes there are stones which have angles and edges, on which account their extraction is difficult.
Some are smooth like acorns and rounded, and these come out easily.
But in those cases where the stone is rough and angular you should slightly increase the incision.
Then if it still will not come out you must then resort to a device— namely to catch hold of it with strong forceps having an extremity like a rasp, to get a tight hold of it so it shall not slip out; or else introduce beneath it a narrow instrument with a crooked end.
And if you then cannot get the stone out, widen the incision slightly; and if there is any bleeding stanch it with vitriol.
If there should be a number of stones first push the largest of them into the neck of the bladder, then cut down upon it; then push a smaller one down after it; and do the same if there be more than two.
But if the stone be very large it is foolish to make a great incision down upon it; for the result is that the patient either dies or has a chronic urinary fistula because the place will not heal at all.
Try rather to manipulate it so that it protrudes; or else attempt to break it up with the forceps so that you can extract it piecemeal.
And when you have completed the operation pack the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it up and apply a pad soaked in olive oil and wine or oil of roses and cold water, to reduce the swelling.
The patient should lie flat on his back and the bindings should not be undone before the third day; and when they are undone foment the place with plenty of oil and water.
Then dress it with Palm ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.
If an increasing and cankerous abscess occur in the wound, or anything similar such as clotting of blood within the bladder, with stoppage of the urine (which would be signified by the urine being accompanied by blood) pass your finger into the wound and remove the blood; for if it lies in it it will lead to sepsis and necrosis of the bladder.
Then wash out the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply whatever treatment is suitable for the case until it heals.
Also at all times during treatment his hips should be bound and kept together so that the medicaments applied to the place may not be disturbed.
Now if the calculus be small and be impacted in the opening of the urinary passage, preventing the exit of the urine, treat it with the means I am about to describe before you go on to make your incision, for often I have found this treatment suffice without incision; I have experience of this. You take a drill of the finest steel, of this shape.
It should be triangular at the point and sharp, with a wooden handle.
Then take a thread and with it bind the penis beneath the calculus to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder.
Then introduce the iron of the drill gently into the meatus until the drill reaches the stone itself, and then very very gently revolve the drill upon the stone with your hand, and try to perforate it, till you pierce it through to the other side. Then the urine will at once be released.
Then, with your hand outside the penis, squeeze the remains of the stone, and they will crumble and be washed out by the urine and the patient will be cured.
But if this treatment is not possible for you on account of some impediment, then tie a thread beneath the stone and another above; then make an incision down upon the stone in the penis itself between the two ligatures, extract it, then undo the ligature and clean away the blood that has clotted in the wound.
The purpose of the ligature beneath the stone is lest it return to the bladder; and the purpose of the one above it is that when you loosen the ligature after removing the stone the skin may fall back into place so as to cover the wound.
On this account, when you tie the upper ligature, you will have to raise the skin so that when you have finished operating it may go back and cover the wound as we have said.
CHAPTER SIXTY-ONE.
On the extraction of a stone from the female.
It is very uncommon for women to have stone.
But if it should happen to a woman the treatment is indeed difficult and is hindered by a number of things.
One is that the woman may be a virgin.
Another is that you will not find a woman who will expose herself to a (male) doctor if she be chaste or married.
A third is that you will not find a woman competent in this art, particularly not in surgery.
Then a fourth is that the place for cutting upon the stone in a woman is a long way from where the stone lies, so the incision has to be deep, which is dangerous.
If necessity compels you to this kind of case, you should take with you a competent woman doctor.
As these are very uncommon, if you are without one then seek a eunuch doctor as a colleague, or bring a midwife experienced in women's ailments or a woman to whom you may give some instruction in this art.
Have her with you and bid her do all that you enjoin; first of all, in searching for the stone. If she perceive that the woman is a virgin she should pass her finger into the anus and palpate for the stone.
If she finds it and keeps her finger on it, then bid her cut down upon it.
But if the patient be not a virgin bid the midwife pass her finger into the vulva and palpate for the stone, after she has placed her left hand upon the bladder and applied a good pressure.
If she finds the stone she should gradually push it down from the outlet of the bladder as far as she can until it reaches the bottom of the pelvis.
Then she should cut down upon it from about the middle of the pudenda near the root of the hip on whichever side she can conveniently feel it; she must keep her finger on the stone, pressing from below.
The incision should start by being small; then let her introduce a sound into the small incision, and when she finds the stone then she will enlarge the incision until she knows that it is big enough for the exit of the stone.
You should know that there are many kinds of calculus: some are large and some are small; smooth and rough; long, rounded, and pronged.
Learn to recognize these types and you will have an indication of what to do.
If you are hindered by a haemorrhage, scatter powdered vitriol on the place and keep it there for a time until the haemorrhage has ceased, and then return to your operating until the stone is out.
See also that you have ready the instruments mentioned for the extraction of stone from the male, to assist you in operating.
If you are hindered by a haemorrhage and you know, by the spurting of the blood, that it comes from an artery that has been cut, then put styptic powder on the place and bind up tightly with bandages and leave it and do not come back to it; let the stone be and do not extract it, for often that loses the patient; then dress the wound.
And after some days, when the acute haemorrhage has subsided and suppuration has set in, return to your operating until you get the stone out.
CHAPTER SIXTY-TWO.
On opening a watery hernia.
A watery hernia is a collection of fluid in the white membrane lying beneath the skin surrounding the testicle, which is called the scrotum.
Sometimes it has a capsule of its own which nature has formed alongside the testis so that one would think it another testicle; it may also form between the skin of the scrotum and the white membrane which we mentioned; however, this occurs very rarely.
This hernia arises from a weakness occurring in the testicles and this matter drains into it; sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
The fluid is of different colours, sometimes yellowish, sometimes blood-red, sometimes like lees, black, and sometimes the fluid is watery-pale; this actually is the commonest.
Now these are the signs whereby we know where the fluid is collecting: if it be in the tunica albugínea, as we have said, the tumour will be round and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg. The testis is not apparent since the fluid hems it in all round.
But if the fluid be contained in a capsule of its own the tumour will be round, to one side of the testicle; therefore one imagines that it is another testicle.
If the fluid be situated between the skin of the scrotum and the tunica albugínea it will be obvious to the touch.
If you wish to know the colour of the fluid, take a sample from the tumour by means of the four-sided exploring needle which has been figured previously; and by what comes out in the track of the explorer you may know the colour of the contained fluid.
When we begin operative treatment the patient should be told to be venesected, if possible, if you see that he is of a plethoric bodily habit.
Then let him lie on his back upon something a little raised, and have a heap of material placed beneath him.
Then sit down on his left side, and bid an assistant sit on his right side and draw out his penis toward one side or other of the scrotum and toward the hypogastrium.
Then take a broad scalpel and make a longitudinal incision in the scrotum, from the middle almost to the pubes.
The incision should be straight, on a parallel with the median raphe of the scrotum, down to the tunica albuginea, and dissect away from it carefully lest you cut it.
You should dissect chiefly on the side where the testicle is most adherent, and take your dissection as far as possible.
Then open up the membrane containing the fluid with a wide perforation and draw off all the fluid.
Then with hooks separate the two edges of the incision and draw the membrane upwards but do not touch the skin overlying the testes; then cut away the membrane in whatever way is possible, either as a whole or piecemeal, particularly the side piece; for unless you use the utmost diligence in cutting it away you cannot be certain that the fluid will not come back.
If the testicle should protrude from its covering of skin while you are operating, return it when you have finished cutting the membrane; then bring together the two edges of your incision with a suture. Then dress with the usual dressings for wounds until healed.
If you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, you will have to tie off the vessels which are in the suspensor, for fear of haemorrhage. Then cut the testicle from the suspensor and remove it and dress as we said above.
If the accumulation of fluid be on both sides you may know it to be a double hydrocele; so make another incision on the other side as you did for the first. If it is convenient for you to make one operation of it, do so.
Then wipe away the blood and apply to the incisions wool that has been soaked in olive-oil or oil of roses and on that again more wool that has been soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the testicles and over the hypogastrium; and over that again folded pieces of linen forming pads and bind them down with a bandage having six heads. Two pieces of cloth should be taken and sewn together and packed in between with carded wool to this pattern.
Two pieces of cloth should be taken and sewn together and packed in between with carded wool to this pattern. The ends by means of which it is attached should be made of cotton or soft wool and should be drawn tight at the waist of the breeches. One of the ends you take over the seat toward the back: the second end you take toward the pubes, the two ends round the thighs below, and the remaining two ends over the groin, and the whole is bound up tight with the belt of the breeches.
This rupture may also be treated by cautery instead of surgery. This will mean taking a knife-edged cautery and cutting with it the skin of the testicles; it should be hot, as we told you before, and used until the white membrane covering the hydrocele be exposed. Then take another cautery of this type, which resembles the Greek letter tau; and with it perforate that membrane.
It should be hot so as to draw out all the humidity.
Then stretch the membrane with hooks, dissect away the capsule with the cautery and cut it away as best you are able until you have completely removed it. But be careful that the heat do not touch the testicle.
You should know that this operation is safer, further removed from the danger of haemorrhage, and better, than operation by incision.
If, while operating either with the knife or the cautery, you are hindered by an inflammatory swelling or haemorrhage or anything else, you should deal with all of them by suitable treatment in accordance with what has been said before.
If the patient be timid and will not suffer this operation on account of its unpleasantness, then treat by perforation as I shall now describe.
When by the signs we have mentioned you are certain that the hernia is watery, you should seat the patient on a high chair and pierce the tumour in its lower part with a broad scalpel.
The perforation should run in the long axis of the body, and it should be an ample opening to let all the fluid run out.
Then put cotton on the place and bind it on and leave it so as to soak up the rest of the fluid; then dress the wound until it heals.
But if the fluid fail to flow out when the opening is made, which would be due to the tunica albuginea's obtruding into the opening and preventing the outlet of the fluid, you should then introduce into the wound a goose-quill or an instrument such as is used for ascites, already described; or else the opening should be widened a little.
But you should know that after six months or so the fluid may come back and collect again; when it does so, perforate him in exactly the same manner; so will the patient prolong his life.
CHAPTER SIXTY-THREE.
On cutting for a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
You should know that cutting for this kind of hernia has an uncertain outcome and in most cases results in death; and therefore I think it better to let it be and to safeguard the patient.
However, I shall mention the manner of operating for this and all kinds of tumour.
Now I say that many tumours arise from the bodies composing the testicles; and this from several causes. It may be from an acrid superfluity running down into the testicles, or from a blow.
The colour of the tumour will be like that of the rest of the body and there is no water to it.
The lump will be solid and often will be stony hard, of a dark colour, and without sensation.
Sometimes also it arises from a knotting and inflation of the arteries, as has been mentioned, or from an inflation of the veins.
The sort arising from a swelling of the arteries may be recognized by a dispersal of the lump when you press upon it with your fingers; this should not be interfered with at all.
The sort arising from a swelling of the vein will not disperse when you press upon it with your fingers.
It is sometimes possible to cut down on this kind and also on the other fleshy tumours thus: make an incision in the skin of the testicles; then draw the testicle upward and out of the tunica albuginea, and free the suspensor from the vessels and tie the vessels, and cut the suspensor after you have freed it from all round the testicle.
Should it happen that the testicle is adherent to the fleshy growth, you will have to cut away the testicle itself and remove it.
But should the adhesion have formed somewhere inside the membranes or in the space between the vessels, then you must free the adhesion as a whole and cut it away with a circular incision.
If the fleshy growth should be at the site of the junction which is behind, you will have to cut the whole thing away and remove the testicle as we have said.
And when your operation is finished, pack the wound with wool moistened with oil of roses and wine; then dress in the usual manner until healed.
CHAPTER SIXTY-FOUR.
On the treatment of hernia with varix.
A varix is a twisted tumour resembling a cluster of grapes, with relaxation of the testicles, which makes movement and exercise and walking difficult for the patient.
The treatment of this condition is of uncertain outcome, akin to those conditions just spoken of.
Nevertheless we must describe the operation for this condition as it was performed by the Ancients.
So I begin by saying that you must have the patient sitting upon a high seat; then push down the suspensor of the testicles and take hold of the skin of the testicles with your fingers together with the blood-vessels near the penis; then let your assistant take hold instead of you and draw out strongly.
Then with a broad sharp scalpel make an oblique incision in the direction of the vessels so that the vessels are laid bare.
Then dissect on all sides in the same way as I told you for extracting the temporal vessels.
Then run through them a needle doubly threaded and tie at the spot where the varix begins and tie it again where the varix ends, then cut through the varix in the middle with an incision at right angles to the length of the body and draw out the turbid corrupt humidity that has gathered in it.
Then dress the wound with the wound dressings usual where you wish to encourage suppuration, so that the vessels nourishing the one testicle may perish; there is no harm in that.
But if all the vessels are varicose then you will have to remove one testicle with its vessels lest the testicle be deprived of nourishment through cutting into the vessels; for it will wither and be of no use.
CHAPTER SIXTY-FIVE.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
This hernia is due to a split occurring in the membrane stretched from the hypogastrium over the belly in the region of the groin. Through this opening the bowel descends upon one of the testes; this opening is due to the membrane's splitting or stretching.
And these two kinds occur from a number of causes: from a blow or jumping or shouting, or lifting a heavy weight, or a similar cause.
The symptoms of it, when it arises from a stretching of the membrane, are that it is a slow and chronic development and does not happen on a sudden, and the swelling is even and deep down, because the membrane is pressing the bowel.
When it is due to a split in the membrane, the signs will be that it starts with a sudden severe pain, and the lump varies in consistency, appearing close under the skin; that is due to the emergence of the bowel and its passage outside the membrane.
Sometimes also the omentum comes out with the bowel, and this hernia is called intestinal and omental; sometimes it contains wind.
Sometimes also the excrement comes down with the bowel and gets held up there, and this involves the patient's death, for thence arises an intractable pain and borborygmi, specially when pressed upon.
The treatment of the varieties of this disease with the knife is dangerous; so be cautious of rushing at it.
The manner of operating is to bid the patient reduce the bowel back into the belly if it be disposed to return, then lie back before you and raise his legs.
Then do you stretch upward the skin adjacent to the groin, and cut the whole length of the skin of the testicles; then attach to the edges of the incision as many hooks as are necessary to open the incision.
The incision should be sufficiently large to allow the testicle to be drawn out.
Then dissect away the tissues that lie beneath the skin of the scrotum so that the hard tunica albugínea be exposed all round.
Then introduce your forefinger in around the testis in the space between the white membrane beneath the skin of the testicle and the second membrane, and with your forefinger free the attachment at the back of the testicle.
Then with your right hand explore within the scrotum and fold back the covering of the testicles, at the same time stretching the tunica albugínea upwards with the left hand, and bring the testis with the membrane up into the opening, and bid your assistant to stretch the testis upwards; and do you fully free it from the posterior attachment.
Feel with your finger that there be no part of the intestine that has got twisted within the tough white membrane; and should you find any push it back into the abdomen.
Then make a counter-incision in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, to let the blood and matter drain away as we bade you before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound, and the bandage that we prescribed (sometimes also the white membrane that we spoke about is cauterized after the incision to forestall haemorrhage, for that usually happens) and let the ligatures be until they fall away spontaneously.
If they are slow in coming away, then foment with hot water and apply something to sweat them off.
Then dress the wound in the usual manner until it heals.
CHAPTER SIXTY-SIX.
On flatulent hernia.
I have not seen anyone pluck up enough courage to attempt the operative treatment of this kind of rupture.
The Ancients indeed said it ought to be done in the same way as hernia with varicocele; namely, to ligate the blood-vessels after cutting down upon them, gently, and lower down. Then make an incision in the middle and apply to the tumour such things as will keep it open until the blood-vessels fall away.
And dress the wound in the manner we have already mentioned until it heals.
CHAPTER SIXTY-SEVEN.
On the treatment of the rupture that occurs in the groin.
Sometimes there occurs a rupture in the groin as we have said, and the part protrudes.
No portion of the intestine descends into the scrotum; or if anything it will be only a tiny portion and will reduce at any time.
But if it goes on for a long time the rupture in the membrane increases until the bowel and omentum descend into the scrotum. It arises from a stretching of the membrane in the groin, as we said; the membrane stretches and then relaxes and the place swells.
Its treatment by the cautery is as I have already described.
Sometimes also it is treated with the knife in this manner: With the patient lying back before you, make an incision three fingers wide, transversely across the swelling of the rupture which projects.
Then perforate the subcutaneous tissues so as to expose the white membrane that lies under the skin alongside the rupture.
Take a probe and place it upon the projecting part of the fascia and push it back into the depths of the abdomen.
Then sew together the two swollen portions of membrane over the end of the probe and suture the one to the other.
Then take out the probe. On no account make the incision into the fascia nor touch the testis nor anything else, as I taught you on the subject of treating the intestinal hernia.
Then dress the wound, and when the stitches come apart remove them and bandage the wound again until it is healed over. For the membrane will draw together and the rupture will not come out again.
But the cautery is better at this spot, for it is safer.
CHAPTER SIXTY-EIGHT.
On the loosening of the skin of the scrotum.
In some men there often occurs a loosening of the skin of the scrotum without any loosening of the organs within. This has a horrible appearance.
He who desires to treat this condition should make the patient lie on his back; and he should cut away all the loose skin that is over and above the normal. Then he should bring together the two edges of the incision with a suture.
Or, if you prefer, first suture the excess of loose skin together, with three or four stitches, and make the suture firm.
Then cut away what is taken up between the stitches. Then dress the wound with the usual dressings till it heals and the stitches come away.
CHAPTER SIXTY-NINE.
On castration.
Castration is forbidden in our law and I ought therefore to make no mention of it in my book. But I must speak of it for two reasons. One reason is that it should be part of the doctor's medical knowledge when asked about it, and that he should know how to treat anyone whom it befalls. Another reason is that often we need to castrate certain animals for the sake of the benefits that accrue from them, such as rams, he-goats and cats, and such animals.
So I say that castration can be performed in two ways: either by contusion; or by opening up and cutting away.
The method by contusion is that we make the animal sit in warm water until his testes are relaxed and become soft and pendent; then rub them with your hand until they are so loosened that they are no longer palpable.
As to castration by open operation and excision, the animal should be held and pressure put upon the scrotum with the left hand.
Then tie the spermatic cord and with one incision cut down upon both testicles so that both are brought up out of the scrotum.
After dissecting them away cut them off; do not leave any of the coverings upon them except the thin membrane covering the vessels.
This manner of castration is better than the contusion method, for contusion often leaves something of the testicles, and the animal desires to couple.
Then dress the wound until healed.
CHAPTER SEVENTY.
On the treatment of the hermaphrodite.
There are two kinds of male hermaphrodite: one has the appearance as of female pudenda with hair in the region of the perineum; the other has the same in the skin of the scrotum between the testes.
Sometimes also urine is excreted through that which is in the skin of the scrotum.
There is also one kind among women, in which there is, above the female pudenda, on the pubes, what resembles the male organs. These are small indeed, but protuberant, one being like the penis and the two others like testicles.
This is the treatment of all three kinds, that is, two male and one female: the superfluous growths must be cut away so that every trace is destroyed; then the usual treatment for wounds should be applied until they are healed.
As to the second kind, in man, where the opening is in the scrotum and the urine runs out of it, there is no operation for this, and no cure.
CHAPTER SEVENTY-ONE.
On cutting the clitoris and fleshy growths in the female genitalia.
The clitoris may grow in size above the order of nature so that it gets a horrible deformed appearance; in some women it becomes erect like the male organ and attains to coitus.
You must grasp the growth with your hand or a hook and cut it off.
Do not cut too deeply, especially at the root of the growth, lest haemorrhage occur.
Then apply the usual dressing for wounds until it is healed.
As to the fleshy growth, that is, flesh growing in the cervix and filling it, and also often protruding like a tail (on which account some of the Ancients called it 'caudate disease'); this too you should cut away as you do for the clitoris, and dress until healed.
CHAPTER SEVENTY-TWO.
On the treatment of unperforated female pudenda.
This condition is when a woman's pudenda have no opening or have only a tiny opening; it may be either congenital or acquired.
The acquired sort is due to some preceding disease; either to a fleshy growth or to a membrane, thick or thin.
It may be in the fundus of the uterus or in its walls or in the upper part or in the lower part; and it prevents intercourse, conception, and delivery; it often also hinders the menses.
This is recognized by inspection by the midwife, if the obstruction be obvious and low. But if it be not visible she should palpate with her fingers or with a probe.
And when the obstruction is due to a thin membrane near the labia you should lose no time in breaking it down.
This is done by applying some sort of pad to the labia; then put both thumbs upon it.
The woman should be upon her back with her legs spread wide apart; then the labia are to be stretched strongly till the thin membrane is ruptured and the obstruction is laid open.
Then take wool soaked in oil and apply to the place, and let the woman engage in coitus every day lest the place close over.
If the membrane be thick and strong you should incise it with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.
But if the obstruction be due to a growth you should catch hold of it with two hooks and cut it away.
And have at hand remedies for allaying haemorrhage without pain, such as acacia and dragon's blood and olibanum, all mixed with egg-white.
Then use a cannula of lead to prevent the wound healing up too quickly.
She should keep it in position for some days and employ a bandage of dry linen.
Then treat with the usual healing dressings until it heals.
Sometimes other growths of flesh arise in the uterus itself; you should cut away in this manner all except cancerous tumours; for a cancerous tumour arising in the uterus is under no circumstance to be treated with the knife.
CHAPTER SEVENTY-THREE.
On the treatment of haemorrhoids and warts and red pustules arising in the female pudenda.
Haemorrhoids are an inflation of the heads of the blood-vessels leading to abundant and constant bleeding. When haemorrhoids are chronic they turn into warts.
I have already mentioned in their place the kinds of wart and their symptoms. Now here I shall say which kinds permit of treatment and which do not.
I begin by stating that haemorrhoids and warts in the depths of the uterus that are not palpable are not able to be treated operatively.
Those at the orifice that are palpable you can treat.
So you should get the woman into a cool place and then draw on the warts with forceps or catch hold with pieces of rough cloth, and cut them away from the roots.
Then if that cause a flow of blood sprinkle with one or other of the powders that stop bleeding but are not corrosive, such as acacia or dragon's blood or olibanum or the like.
Then raise her legs up against the wall for a while and then bring them down into cold water.
And if the haemorrhage persist for a long time make her sit in an infusion of sumac and pomegranate rind and oak-galls and the like.
Then take barley flour and beat it up with honey and vinegar, and apply to the back a plaster made of this.
And if the bleeding cease, good; but if not, apply to the loins and breasts cupping-vessels without scarifying.
Then take wool and dip it in the juice of red cynomorium or plantain or wild eglantine, together with syrup of oak galls, and apply to the place.
And when the swelling has subsided treat the place with ointment until it heals.
CHAPTER SEVENTY-FOUR.
On the perforation of eruptions occurring in the uterus.
From time to time there occur in the womb various kinds of tumour, such as cancer and the stony tumour and ulcer and abscess and gangrene and fistulae and varicosities and cracks and warts and inflamed tumours; all these diseases I have mentioned, with their varieties and their symptoms, in the appropriate section.
But now in this treatise we must mention an inflamed tumour of the kind where there is a collection of pus, and the manner of its opening with the knife.
You should inspect it, and if the pain of the tumour is acute from the outset, with pulsation and inflammation and fever, and, if it is visible, you see that it is red, then do not be in a hurry to open, but treat it with applications helpful for suppuration till these symptoms have subsided.
Then you should get the patient to sit in a chair having a double seat, lying back. She should put her feet together upon her abdomen, with the thighs apart and the arms joined under the knees and bound together in a suitable manner.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and employ the instrument for opening the orifice of the womb, which will be described later.
When you are going to use this instrument, you should measure with a probe the depth of the womb so that the instrument be not introduced beyond this measure lest the patient be harmed; if the instrument be longer, pads should be put over the rim of the cervix to prevent the passage of its whole length.
You must put the screw that runs in the instrument, in from the top and hold the instrument while your assistant turns the screw until the entrance of the uterus is opened.
When the abscess is exposed, and on manual palpation is found to be thin and soft, you should make an incision at its head with a broad scalpel.
And when all the matter is evacuated you should place on the wound a soft wick soaked in oil of roses or green oil with some styptic quality, and let it come outside from the incision into the cervix uteri.
Over the area of the uterus and pubes there should be clean wool soaked in an infusion of mallows.
Then after two days dress with a suitable ointment until healed.
Sometimes also both the wound and the uterus are washed out with a douche of honey and water, then of a decoction of liquorice root or long aristolochy; then go back to the ointment.
But if the lesion be hidden in the depths of the womb then you will have to abstain from operative treatment but carry out treatment as spoken of in its place.
CHAPTER SEVENTY-FIVE.
On the training of midwives in how to treat living foetuses when not brought forth in the natural manner.
If you see the woman strain her abdomen and desire to breathe more air, and the pangs come easily to her and she hastens to deliver the child, by this you may know that the labour will follow a natural course and that the presentation will be vertex with the afterbirth, either together with the child or hanging by the umbilical cord.
And when you observe these signs it will be necessary to put pressure upon the abdomen to bring forth the foetus quickly. For when it presents the vertex the afterbirth comes down with it and she is thoroughly cleansed of those superfluities.
But a delivery that is contrary to this is unnatural and wrong. Sometimes the infant is delivered by its feet; or by its hands before either head or feet; or a single hand or foot; or the head comes out together with a foot. Or it comes out all twisted, often with the nape of the neck first; or in other wrong positions.
So the midwife must have wisdom and dexterity and be skilled in all these cases and beware of failures and mistakes.
I shall explain the technique in these modes of delivery so that she may be instructed and may be acquainted with them all.
When the foetus comes out by the vertex in the normal manner and yet the delivery is with great difficulty for the woman and you see that her strength is getting exhausted, then make her sit on a seat and have her held firmly, and foment her womb in a decoction of fenugreek and in bland oils.
Then the midwife should take between two fingers a little scalpel and make an incision in the foetal membrane or open it with the finger nail, to allow the contained waters to flow out; and put pressure upon the woman's abdomen until the foetus comes down.
But if it will not come down then the woman should have an enema of mucilage of fenugreek with oil of sesame.
Then bid her bear down after the enema, and with ptarmica stimulate her to sneeze; and close her mouth and nose for a while and the foetus will quickly come out.
If the hands of the foetus present, you should slowly and gently push them back; and if they will not go back then place the woman upon a seat, have her feet raised and meanwhile shake the seat; but the woman should be held lest the shaking cause her to fall off.
But if the two hands will not go back and the foetus is dead cut them off and draw out the remains. Or tie tapes to the hands and pull on them evenly and it will come out.
Foot presentation: when the foetus presents feet first you should raise them both; then you should very gently turn the foetus so as to straighten it. Then take one of its feet and stretch it gently.
When they come down as far as the hips, bid her bear down, make her sneeze with ptarmica, and it will come out.
But if it will not come out with these means we have described, you should return the foetus gently until you have placed it in the natural position; then it will come out easily.
But if it defies all that we have described, take mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and oil of sesame and dissolved gum, and pound them all well together in the mortar and anoint the woman's pudenda and lower abdomen; then make her sit down in warm water reaching to the costal margin.
And when you see the lower parts are softened, make a suppository of myrrh and let her introduce it; and when she has had the suppository in for a while make her sneeze, stopping her nose and mouth; and press gently upon the abdomen; then will the foetus immediately emerge.
Presentation by the side with one hand hanging down: attempt to manœuvre the hand back again; but if you cannot reduce it then make the woman stand up and walk.
But if she cannot walk then have her lie on a couch, and agitate her feet violently. Then employ the ointment which I described among the mucilages.
If parturition begins, make her sit upon a seat and attempt the reduction of the hand and version of the foetus to the natural position, and make the woman sneeze and bear down until the child is born.
Presentation on the back, with hands outstretched and face towards the mother's back: the midwife should take the infant's hand and then turn him very slowly, and gently rectify his position.
Then when he is in the correct position apply to the maternal passage the oil and mucilage prescribed.
Then bid the woman move gently and when she has done so make her sit down upon a seat and bid her lean over to her right side; then bid her bear down, and with ptarmica make her sneeze ; then the foetus will come forth.
The foetus presenting laterally, doubled up : when it presents at the os in this manner together with the membrane, open the membrane with your finger nail and let out the waters.
And if it adhere over the infant's face and neck, cut it away from the umbilicus lest he be strangled and die.
Then push the foetus back till it is in the proper position, and bid the woman bear down a few times until the foetus comes forth.
The birth of twin or multiple foetuses: you should know that it is a common occurrence for twins to be born alive, and sometimes three or four infants, but this is a rarity; while five after this manner is altogether unnatural and they never live.
Although they may be more than one, they are enveloped in a single membrane but separated one from the other by a dividing membrane joined to the umbilicus of each one. And when they are born they may come in the natural easy manner of a single foetus; or by any abnormal presentation such as we have described.
And if one of them be born with difficulty, presenting in some unnatural manner as described, the treatment is also as described.
Let the midwife be delicate and do whatever she does gently and calmly, adopting in each case whatever technique it demands that will conduce to a safe result.
A note on the foetuses that may be formed in the womb and abort.
Sometimes in the womb there may form one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than ten. And I can vouch that one woman had an abortion of seven foetuses and another woman of fifteen, all of them formed.
And all this should be part of the midwife's knowledge, for one day she may meet such a case and she must deal with it in the proper way.
CHAPTER SEVENTY-SIX.
On the extraction of the dead foetus.
When you have dealt with a dead foetus by those methods mentioned in their chapter, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to operate, you should examine to see if the woman be in a healthy state and not having any disease on account of which you might entertain a fear for her life.
The woman should lie on her back on a couch, her head tilted back and her legs raised.
An assistant on either side should hold her down firmly or she should be bound down to the couch, lest the body be drawn out of position in extracting the foetus.
Then the opening should be anointed with moistening oils and with mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and with linseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages and gently introduce it into the vagina and with it locate a place in the foetus to fix hooks in.
The suitable places for that: consider, and if the foetus present the vertex then she should fix the hooks in its eyes or in the neck or in the mouth or palate or beneath the chin, or the collarbone, or about the ribs, or beneath the false ribs.
But if it present the feet let the hooks be fixed in the pubic region or middle ribs.
She should hold the hook in the right hand and put the curved part between the fingers of the left hand, and introduce the hand gently and fix a hook in one of the places before mentioned, driving it in until it comes to a hollow.
Then opposite it let her fix another or a third if need be, so as to give even traction, not pulling to one side.
Then she should pull evenly, not just in a straight line but with the foetus moved from side to side so that its exit may be eased, as is done in extracting a tooth.
From time to time the tension must be relaxed, and if any part of it be held up the midwife must oil some of her fingers and introduce them to one side to manipulate the retained part.
And if a part only of the foetus come away she should shift the hooks to other parts a little higher up, and so on, until the whole of the foetus has come out.
If the hand should come out before any other part and it is impossible to reduce it on account of the pressure, then a tape should be wound round it and she should pull on it until it is all out; then it should be cut off at either the carpal or the elbow joint.
In the same manner should the other hand be dealt with, and the feet.
If the foetal head be large and it is tightly squeezed in exit, or if there be a collection of fluid in the head, you should introduce between your fingers a spike-shaped scalpel and split the head to let the water out; or you should smash it with the instrument called cephalotribe which will be illustrated, together with figures of the other instruments, in the chapter following.
In the same manner you act if the foetus have a naturally large head: either you should cut the skull open or smash it with the cephalotribe as we said; then you should draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head comes out and the foetus is held up at the collar bones, an incision should be made to let out the humidity in the thorax, for the thorax will then shrink.
But if the thorax does not shrink and is not disposed to emerge then you should cut off pieces in any manner possible.
If the lower belly be swollen or dropsical then you should make an opening to draw out all the fluid.
If the foetus present the feet then the extraction will be easy and it will be a simple matter to guide it to the maternal opening.
If it be stuck about the abdomen or thorax then pull on it with a cloth wound around your hand and cut an opening in the abdomen or thorax to allow the contents to flow out.
If all the limbs are removed but the head is turned backwards and is jammed, the midwife should introduce her left hand and, if the mouth of the womb is open, should put the hand into the cervix of the womb and investigate the head and, with her fingers, draw it down toward the opening and fix a hook or two in it, and extract it with these.
If it should be that the mouth of the womb is closed on account of an abscess, then one must not be rough with it but should use in this case instillations of moistening greasy substances; plasters also should be applied; and the woman should sit in a bath of softening and moistening waters.
If the foetus present laterally and it is possible to reposition it, there should be applied the things mentioned for a living child.
But if this be not possible then it should be cut away piecemeal and extracted.
It is necessary that not a scrap of the afterbirth be left behind in the womb.
When you have completed your treatment then also apply those treatments we have mentioned for abscesses occurring in the uterus.
If haemorrhage occurs, the woman should be put into styptic fluids and the usual treatment applied.
Now I myself once saw a woman who had become pregnant and the foetus had then died in utero; then again she conceived and the second foetus also died; and after a long while she got a swelling in the umbilicus which grew and eventually it opened and began to produce pus.
I was called in to attend her, and I treated her for a long while but the wound did not heal up.
So I applied to it certain very strongly drawing ointments, and then a bone came away from the place; then a few days passed and another bone came out; and I was mightily astonished at this, seeing that the abdomen is a place where there are no bones.
I formed the opinion that these were bones from a dead foetus.
I continued this procedure and got a great number of bones out of her, the woman being in the best of health; indeed she lived for quite a while like that, with a little pus being exuded from that place.
I bring forward this uncommon occurrence here since it gives knowledge and help about the sort of treatment that the doctor who practises surgery may contrive.
On the forms of instruments necessary for extracting the foetus.
Speculum for opening the entrance of the womb.
This is the type of instrument with which books are pressed. It has two screws at either end of two pieces of wood; but this instrument should be more slender than a book press, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.
The width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers' breadth and the thickness about one, and the length a span and a half; and in the middle of both pieces of wood, firmly attached, should be two projections made of the same kind of wood, each half a span long or a little more, and two fingers wide or a little more.
It is these two projections that are to be introduced into the vagina so that it is thereby opened when you turn the screws.
Another instrument, for the same purpose, but smaller and lighter.
It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, but at the end it has two projections as you can see; and the length of each is about a span and the breadth two fingers.
When you wish to open the womb with this, make the woman sit on a couch with her legs hanging down, parted; then introduce the two projections pressed together into the orifice of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument lower down between her thighs; then open your hand in the same way as you would do with forceps, to the extent to which you wish to open the womb, so as to allow the midwife to do what she desires.
Another type of screw speculum mentioned by the Ancients.
Figure of the thruster for thrusting the foetus.
Figure of the cephalotribe for crushing the foetal head. It resembles scissors with toothed jaws, as you see.
It resembles scissors with toothed jaws, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps, as you see in this illustration, with teeth like the teeth of a saw; and you may either cut or crush with it.
Figure of a hook.
Figure of a doubleheaded hook.
Figure of two broad scalpels for cutting up the foetus.
Figure of a two-ended scalpel.
The more types of these instruments the practitioner has ready by him, the more rapidly he operates, and the greater his reputation among men.
So do not neglect to have ready by you a single one of these instruments, for you will certainly need it.
On extracting the afterbirth.
When in a confinement the afterbirth is left behind, you should bid the woman hold her breath then make her sneeze with ptarmica, with your hand holding her mouth and nose; and if it come away thus, good.
But if not, then take a pot, pierce a hole in the lid, and put in it herbs that will open the womb, such as pennyroyal, rue, anise, chamomile, artemisia, cassia, and centaury, some or all of these remedies, submerge them in water, and place on the fire.
Then fix a silver tube to the hole in the cover and bring the other end into the orifice of the womb and hold it in position so that the vapours may reach the body of the uterus.
Then let her sneeze, as we said, and the afterbirth will quickly come away.
But if, after this treatment, it still remains and does not come out, then tell the midwife to dip her hand in oil of sesame or mucilage of marshmallow and introduce it into the vulva and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, to take hold of it and very gently draw it until she bring it out. But if it be adherent to the depths of the uterus, then let her pass her hand in as we described until she find the afterbirth; then let her draw very slowly and gently lest by violent pulling she cause a prolapse; and she should slowly move it from side to side, left and right; then let her increase the traction, for then it gives way to the pull and is freed from its adhesions.
If the uterine opening be narrowed, we have earlier mentioned the treatment by induced sneezing and that of the pot and herbs.
But if it does not come away by all the means we have described, beware of treating her roughly with repeated traction. Whatever of it comes out of the opening should be tied to the woman's thigh, and then syringe her with Tetrapharmacon ointment; for that will cause putrefaction in a few days and it will loosen and come out.
However, when it necroses foul odours arise from it that ascend to the stomach and head and these cause harm to the patient; so she should have suffumigations appropriate for this.
One of the Ancients tried suffumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.
The form of instrument for suffumigating a woman for retention of the menses and of the afterbirth and the like.
It is made of lead, resembling a funnel, or it may be made of bronze.
Its narrow extremity is introduced into the pudenda and the wide end is put over the fire, and the suffumigation is produced on the hot coals.
Keep it there until all the fumes are gone, and repeat once.
On imperforate anus.
Infants are quite often born with the anus imperforate, closed by a fine membrane; then the midwife should perforate the membrane with her finger or pierce it with a sharp scalpel, being careful not to touch the muscle.
Then wool dipped in oil and wine should be applied, and treat it with ointments until healed.
If you are afraid it may close up, put into the opening a leaden tube for many days, which will be removed when the child wants to evacuate the bowel.
Sometimes also the anus is closed by the scarring of a wound or an abscess; then the scarring should be incised, and then dressed by those methods we have mentioned, including the leaden tube.
On the treatment of fistulae occurring in the lower parts.
Fistulae in the lower parts are a knotting and thickening of the tissues occurring externally near the anus or in the perineum to one side.
A fistula may be single or multiple.
When a thickening of this kind has become chronic it opens and there flows out a white watery humidity or thin pus.
The former may be known by faeces or flatus coming out of them when the patient opens the bowel. Often also worms come out of them.
Sometimes also there are fistulae occurring in the perineum which penetrate to the urinary bladder and to the urethra; and some also penetrate to the hip-joint and to the coccyx.
A fistula penetrating to the anus may also be distinguished from one not so penetrating by introducing the finger into the anus and a fine probe into the fistula, made of either bronze or iron, if there be no bend in the course of the fistula.
But if the course of the fistula be tortuous, then introduce a thin leaden probe or a horse-hair, until you feel the probe or horse-hair come on to your finger.
But if you do not feel it at all and if no faeces nor flatus nor worm come out of the opening, as we said, you may know it is not perforating; so hurry on with treatment.
When the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the urinary passages it is signified by the passage of urine and by the fact that medical remedies cannot cure it.
But if it penetrate to the hip-joint or coccyx, this will be signified by the probe's passing right through to there if it be a straight passage to the bone; and by the pain felt in that part; and by the chronic purulent discharge; and the fact that medical treatment does no good and ointment does not heal it.
There is in these perforating sinuses no cure whatever; and their treatment is labour in vain for all the ignorant doctors who pretend that they understand them.
But there is hope in operative treatment for those that are not perforating and chronic, as I know from experience and shall now describe.
Thus: have the patient lying on his back before you and let both his legs be raised with the thighs flexed back upon his belly; then introduce a probe of bronze, or of lead if the course be tortuous, until you determine where the probe reaches.
Then, if the patient feel the probe somewhere in the region of the anus, put your forefinger into the anus.
If you feel the probe itself with your finger, coming through bare, and you do not feel anything interposing between your finger and the probe, either membrane or flesh, then you may know for certain that it is a perforating fistula; do not spend your energy over it, for, as we have said, there is no cure.
Yet some have said that it may be cured in certain cases, but rarely.
The treatment from which some relief may be hoped is to heat a fine cautery corresponding to the width of the fistula, as we have said before, and pass this, hot, through the fistula to the anus; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those compact tags of superfluous flesh, which resemble quills, are burnt away.
Then dress with a pad soaked in oil until the burnt tissue comes away. Then treat with healing ointments and, if it heals, well and good. If not, it will never heal with any other treatment.
If you introduce the probe and it does not come through to your finger in the anus, and there be between your finger and the probe something firm interposing, either tissue or lining, and you see the fistula to be close under the skin, then cut open the skin at the origin of the fistula and continue your incision, with the probe in the fistula, until you come to the place where the tip of the probe has reached and the probe is freed and falls out.
Then clean out all the solid quill-like pieces of tissue and let none remain.
If the haemorrhage be too much for you and interferes with your operating when cutting away the tissues, then the best and most speedily efficacious thing you can do is to cauterize, either with fire or with caustics. For cauterizing with fire unites two good characteristics, the burning away of those superfluous tissues, and the stanching of the bleeding, as well as the drying-up of humidity.
Then treat with a dressing soaked in butter, or sulphur pounded with oil, until the place putrefies and the burnt tissue comes away in the pus. Then treat the wound with salves to encourage healing and the growth of firm flesh, these remedies having also a styptic and drying quality.
Then treat the wound with salves to encourage healing and the growth of firm flesh, these remedies having also a styptic and drying quality. Then when the wound is healed over it is cured for good and there is no fear of a recurrence.
If the fistula reaches deep into the anus and is far from the surface of the body, then put your finger into the anus and palpate.
If you feel a barrier of flesh or membrane interposed between the probe and your finger, and it be nearly through, then there is nothing to be done except to try a remote hope.
There are three methods that you may employ. The first is to cauterize it, as we have said. Or you may cut it open until you reach the termination so as to be able to insert a dressing and bring the medicament into contact with it, but do not extend your incision too far lest you cut into the sphincter muscle and the patient become incontinent of faeces; then dress in the manner we have said and perhaps it may heal. Or you may perforate the barrier and pierce it through, after incising to the vicinity of the anus, as we have said, either with the probe or with some other sharp-pointed instrument; then clear away the fleshy granulations in the incision as far as you are able; then attempt the repair of the whole wound with the incision and the upper opening, until it heals.
Sometimes also a fistula is cut out in this way: namely, you pass a probe into the fistula; it should be near the circle of the junction of the outer skin with the anal mucosa; then take a probe with an eyed point like a shoemaker's needle; put into it a thread twisted of about five threads, and insert into the fistula until it reaches the end.
If it has perforated through at the anal margin within, nearby, draw the thread out of that perforation by introducing your finger into the anus. Draw out the end of the thread and tie the two ends together and leave for one or two days. As the thread cuts into the tissues, tighten it up well until those tissues enclosed in the thread are cut through and fall away.
Then dress the wound until it be healed and sound.
If the mouth of the fistula is not perforated, perforate it as best you can, unless the depth is too great; in which case you must not do so lest you cut the muscle. Then treat as we have said until it heals.
Figure of the sharp-pointed scalpel for cutting open fistulae; the curved edge should be exceedingly sharp and the other blunt, lest you cut what should not be cut, as you see.
On cutting and incising piles that are bleeding, and the treatment of fissures.
Haemorrhoids are of two kinds: either internal, resembling red bubbles or grape-seeds, small or large, with blood perpetually flowing, and they may be single or multiple; or they may be external, round about the anus.
External ones are for the most part fairly dry; a little yellowish fluid or blood constantly oozes from them, and they are of the colour of the body.
The treatment of internal piles: bid the patient open his bowel and bear down until the anus opens out and the swellings are disclosed to you; then quickly take hold of them with hooks or with your finger-nail and cut them off near the roots.
If the hook does not retain its hold on them because of their humidity and softness, then cut them with a piece of rough material or a rag of goat-hair, or draw them out with your fingers and cut them off; and after excision sprinkle some caustic powder on to act instead of the cautery; or cauterize them as previously described in the book on cauterization; then dress in the usual way until healed.
But if the anus will not open out for you then give a slightly corrosive enema so as to wash out what is within, and then, the anus will open out quickly when the patient bears down.
Now the treatment of external piles is easy and simple: take hold of them with your finger-nails or catch them up with a hook and cut them away; and treat as before mentioned until cured.
But with the patient who refuses excision with the knife, this manner of removal should be practised: thread a twisted thread into a needle, then draw the piles upward and run the needle through the root of each, from one side to the other, and wind the ends of the thread round beneath the needle as it lies crosswise, and bind the pile firmly; then knot the thread and remove the needle.
Do this with each pile, but leave one not destroyed so that the superfluous blood may flow from it.
Then apply to the anus a piece of material soaked in oil of roses or wax; apply it and bid the patient lie quiet; then leave him until the piles fall away. When they fall away, dress with ointments and the usual dressings until healed.
If they become chronic, and medical treatment is unavailing, you should scrape them with the edge of a scalpel or with your finger-nail until they become soft and the upper layer, that prevents healing, is removed; then dress until they mend as they should.
But if they do not heal, repeat the scraping more strongly than at first until they bleed freely and become raw; then apply dressings and they will heal.
A corn is a round knob, the same colour as the body and resembling the head of a nail. It occurs in all parts of the body but particularly in the soles of the feet and the toes, whence arises pain in walking.
You should cut away what is round the corn and take it with forceps or a hook and tear it out by the root; then dress it.
If you wish you may cauterize it in the manner already described in the book on cauterization.
Then concerning dry warts: a wart is a little round rough compact eminence on the surface of the body; it occurs often on the hands of boys.
Now the treatment is to draw out the wart and cut if off; or tie it off with a silken thread or a hair until it falls out; or if you wish, cauterize as said before, either with the actual cautery or with caustic.
A pimple is also a little compact thick prominence on the skin surface, going deep; when it gets cold there is a feeling as of an ant's sting in it. It is found all over the body but mostly on the hands.
The treatment is to take the quill of a strong feather of the goose or the vulture, and place the quill over the pimple so as to encircle it with the circumference of the tube; then revolve the quill with your hand so as to cut all round the pimple, and go deep into the flesh, and then the pimple may be drawn out by the roots.
If you wish you may extract it with a tube of bronze or of iron, of this form.
The upper closed part of the tube should be fine, solid, and twisted, to give easy purchase for the fingers in holding and revolving it.
If you wish you may cauterize the pimple as described earlier on the cauterization of warts in the book on the cautery.
On the kinds of instrument for administering enemata in diseases of the rectum, and in diarrhoea and colic.
A clyster may be made of silver or of Chinese alloy or of cast or hammered bronze. Large and small varieties of this instrument are made, to suit those on whom they are to be used; those for the treatment of children will be small. Patients with stricture of the anus, or pain, will have very slender clysters.
Figure of a large clyster.
The upper end of the funnel to which the membrane is bound should be broad like this; it should have a rim where the membrane may be bound down, as you see.
The lower extremity, which is introduced into the anus, should be closed and smooth, and on one side of it should be two holes, and on the other, one; the width of the holes should be about that of a probe or a little wider.
The membrane to hold the medicament is made out of an animal's bladder or of parchment, made up in the form of a small bag, a span in diameter.
It should be pierced with a number of holes in a circle a finger's breadth apart; and into these holes pass a strong thread of yarn, twisted of ten or so threads, and with this gather up the skin like a bag; and when the medicament is placed in it tie it down firmly between the two rims on the upper end of the clyster; and then give the enema.
This is the figure of the circle of skin with the holes. Now the way to give an enema with this instrument is for the parchment or bladder to be filled with the medicament, which should be warmed so as to be tolerable for the patient; but beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
Then let the patient lie back and raise his legs; and put under them a leather mat or a blanket. Then anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg-white or mucilage of fenugreek or the like; then gently pass it into the anus; then let an assistant take the membrane in both hands and together firmly squeeze it until all the contents are squirted into the bowel. Then the clyster should be removed and the patient should raise his legs against the wall.
Then the clyster should be removed and the patient should raise his legs against the wall. If the enema stimulates him to evacuate, let him hold it as long as he can; if he delay all night long, it will be all the more efficacious.
If the enema be given in a case of diarrhoea and he has to evacuate hastily, then the use of the enema should be repeated until he is cured.
If there be haemorrhoids or painful tumours in the anus, the clyster should be exceedingly slender and smooth, of the sort employed for children.
On the cure of wounds.
I have already mentioned in the appropriate section the treatment of such wounds as are suitable for cauterization. Here I shall describe the operative and medical treatment in full.
So I begin by saying that wounds differ according to that which causes them and according to the site.
Those things that cause wounds are many: a knock from a stone, a cut from a sword or a knife, a blow by a spear, stick, or arrow; and many such things.
To consider wounds according to their site on the body, they are such as a wound occurring in the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver, and so on.
Now I am going to describe the treatment of certain wounds, so that you may take them as a standard and a guide for other wounds.
I shall begin particularly with the simple wounds of the head; for mention of the compound wounds will be made at the beginning of the third book.
I say then, that when there occurs a simple wound of the head, with no accompanying bone-fracture, you should look; and if it be caused by a knock from a stone or the like, and has only broken the skin, but it is a big wound and you fear lest there occur an abscess, then bleed the cephalic vein at once without delay; draw off from him blood in proportion to his vigour if there is no contra-indication to venesection; and particularly if the haemorrhage from the wound be slight.
The venesection should be on the opposite side to the wound; and caution the patient against gluttony and wine and rich food.
But if from any cause venesection is prevented, he should be on a light diet and avoid meat and wines.
And apply to the wound, if there be any inflammation, cotton wool soaked in oil of roses, either alone or with a somewhat astringent wine.
And if you are sure there is no inflammatory swelling, then apply directly to the wound, if its blood is fresh and it is unaltered by the air, the powder that I shall describe to you a little later.
But if the air has already changed the wound, apply to it one of the ointments to cause it to discharge the pus; then dress until healed.
Now if it be a great wound, being caused by a sword-cut or the like, and dressings will not bring the edges of the wound together, you should suture them together in the manner I shall describe in dealing with the suture of abdominal wounds.
But if the skin has actually disclosed the bone, and is attached by a small strip only, then cut it away and dress the wound with medicaments that will produce firm flesh to replace the skin, and bid the patient go on a diet of solid food such as brawn and gruels and the like.
And if decomposition arise in the skin and it will not adhere to the bone, then excise all the diseased part and discard it and then dress.
If in these wounds there be an artery or vein shedding blood, and medicinal applications do not stanch it, then examine the artery, and if you find it not quite severed then cut it through with a scalpel and ligature it; and if you are compelled, our directions being unavailing, then cauterize until the haemorrhage stops.
If these be small and simple wounds their treatment will be a light and easy matter; it is sufficient to sprinkle some of this powder on while they are still bleeding, before the atmosphere causes a change.
Description of the powder: let one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood be taken, and three parts of quick or slaked lime, all beaten up together and passed through the sieve; and let the wound be packed with this and bound up tightly so that the powder sticks in position and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind pads above and let it be, not undoing it so long as it remains without swelling; for the dressing will not come away of itself until it is healed.
Lime alone can do this if you have no olibanum and dragon's blood at hand.
It has exactly the same effect too on most large wounds, when the application and bandaging are properly done, and when the haemorrhage is recent, so long as the air has not changed them.
If, however, the air has brought about some change, especially if it be in the summer season, then there is no point in the application of this powder. Treat it then as we have said, by applying one or other of the suppurative ointments; or by applying a gruel of barleymeal with water and honey, so that the pus flows; then treat by all the usual methods until cured.
If, with the wound, there be also fracture of a bone, if it be slight, you should extract it with forceps.
I mention the treatment of fractures of the head later on.
On wounds in the neck:
If a wound occur in the neck the treatment of it does not differ from that of a head wound, if it be simple.
But if a nerve or artery in the neck happens to be cut: if it be a nerve, there is no device that will serve except to avoid treatment of it by strong styptic remedies such as verdigris and vitriol and the like; for these injure the nerve and cause spasm; and under no circumstance let anything cold be applied to the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold and it is continuous with the brain, which is the most noble among the organs.
But let your remedy for it be mild, such as lime slaked in sweet water many times and moistened with olive-oil or oil of roses; and with tutty, likewise washed in sweet water; and other minerals according to this prescription, and with bland ointments.
If the wound be large, use stitches or draw the edges of the wound together with pads; then dress until cured.
But if there be depth to the wound and a sinus appears at the bottom of it, in which pus has collected, then make an opening at the site of greatest depth.
Now if an artery has been cut in the wound and you are in time to find it still bleeding, divide it or ligature it; or cauterize it if you are compelled to.
If it be such a wound that some of the cartilages of the trachea are laid open, or the whole trachea, the jugular veins being safe and sound, then join the skin edges together with a suture over the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe, but straighten it and restore to its natural form; then tie firmly and leave for some days; then treat with salves having some styptic and astringent quality, until healed.
If the wound has affected bone, examine it, and if there be fragments of bone in it get them all out, or all you can. Those you cannot get hold of, leave until the wound suppurates and heals, and it will be easy to extract them.
If it be a fresh wound, sprinkle on the powder I have described ; and if any bone corrupt in the wound and it becomes a fistula, treat it by those means we shall mention in their place.
If it be a piercing wound by a spear or a knife, and you see that it is deep, examine if there be a passage of air out of it when the patient breathes; whence you may know that the injury is mortal.
But if it is not deep and the haemorrhage is fresh, then do not straight away apply powder or bandage lest it keep the blood in the depths, so that it be returned to the heart and kill the patient; but apply to it a drawing ointment, and uncover it twice daily.
If you have no ointment, apply carded cotton to the opening of the wound to soak up the humidities issuing from it. And make the patient sleep on the (side of the) wound so that what collects therein may flow out.
And if three or four days pass by after the wound, and the patient have no spasm or harmful palpitation of the heart nor obstruction to drawing breath, and you see that in other respects he is doing well, you may know that the wound is not dangerous; so treat it with pads and the usual dressings until it heals.
But if it will not heal and it permanently discharges pus, you may know that it has become a fistula; look for the treatment of this in the proper place.
If the wound be from a cut with a sword or knife, a straightforward surface wound in the breast or back, then treat it as described before; that is, by suture if it be a great wound or by powder if it be a small one.
But if there has also been injury to the bone, cutting out fragments from it, you should explore the wound and hasten to draw out the fragments if they are detached from the bone; but if they are not detached then let be until the wound suppurates, when the removal of the fragments will be easy.
Then with regard to other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the same class of treatment should be used for them as for those already mentioned.
On wounds of the abdomen, and protrusion of the intestine; and on suturing them.
The tear that occurs in the abdomen may be great or small or it may be middle-sized.
Small openings may also be difficult in another way, for they are bound to be harder to reduce, and if you do not hurry to return the gut to its place at once it will swell up and enlarge, thus rendering reduction difficult.
So the best tear is the medium-sized, for in this case the reduction of the intestine will not be as difficult as in the two other cases.
Then you should know that suturing the abdomen may be carried out in four ways. Two of them are general; suitable both for suture of the abdomen and for other wounds of the body.
The other two sutures are special; they may be used for other wounds, but are more suitable for abdominal wounds.
I shall describe each one to you separately, with comments and explanation.
I begin then by saying that when the wound is small, and a piece of intestine protrudes from it, rendering the reduction of it difficult, the difficulty will be due to one of two causes: either on account of the smallness of the fissure, as we said; or because the gut has become inflated on account of the coldness of the air.
If the latter case obtains, the gut must be warmed by fomenting with a sponge or piece of cloth bathed with warm water or water in which have been boiled rushes and cyperus and hyacinth, bathing the gut until the inflation is gone down.
Wine that is somewhat astringent may do; in bringing down the swelling it is better than plain water.
When you see that the swelling has come down, bathe the gut with water in which have been infused althea and mallows; for with this the reduction of the bowel becomes easy, using the lightest effort.
But if after this treatment the reduction is still difficult, open up the wound a little with the instrument for opening up haemorrhoids.
The first method, if possible, is better than incision, but one may be compelled to incise when other means have failed.
This is the form of the instrument.
The curved side should be sharpened, but not the other; the slender extremity should not be as slender as a scalpel, but rather blunt; it is an instrument like a small polo-stick, as you see.
When the wound is opened up a little with the instrument and the bowel is reduced, it is important to return it to its natural shape and proper position, if you can, for that is better.
When the wound is large and in the lower abdomen the patient should lie on his back and have his legs higher than his head; but if it be in the upper abdomen his head and chest should be placed higher than his lower parts.
And in the same way if the opening be on one side of the abdomen you should always make it your object to put the wounded side higher than the other.
So must you proceed in large or middling wounds.
But in small wounds put the patient in a position convenient to yourself. Then have an assistant under your direction to enclose within his hands the whole of the wound and bring the edges together, and then uncover it bit by bit for the one who is putting in the stitches.
Now this is the description of one general suture, namely: one or more needles are taken, depending on the size of the wound; then, leaving about the width of the little finger from the end of the opening, pass an unthreaded needle from within through both edges of the skin together with both edges of the peritoneum which lies beneath the skin, piercing from one side to the other; thus you will have brought together both skin edges and both peritoneal edges, making four layers.
Then wind a double thread several times round the needle, and tighten up from both sides so as to bring the two edges of the wound perfectly together. Then again leave about a finger's breadth and put in another needle and fasten it with thread as you did in the first instance; and go on doing this with as many needles as you need until you have finished mending the whole wound.
The needles should be of medium fineness; for the very fine needles soon cut into the flesh; while thick needles, on the other hand, are difficult to pass through the skin; so they should be medium between fineness and thickness.
You should not introduce the needle too near the edge of the skin lest the tissues be soon cut through and the wound gape before it has joined.
Nor should there be too great an interval between the stitches, lest the wound be prevented from scarring up.
Then cut off the ends of the needles lest they hurt the patient during sleep; and make for him pads of linen scraps to cover the needle ends on both sides; and let them be until you know the wound is healed up.
This method of suture with needles is most suitable in small wounds, for one or two needles or thereabouts will probably be enough for such.
Now the second kind of general suture is to bring together all four edges, the two skin edges and the two peritoneal edges, at one and the same time, with a needle furnished with a twisted thread of medium thickness.
Then when the needle has pierced these four edges bring it back precisely to where you began, so that the thread may lie knitted over the wound to make a stitch in the manner of sewing up the bags in which goods are packed.
The distance between stitches should be a little finger's breadth.
Everybody is familiar with this stitch.
With this stitch I once sewed up a wound that a man got in the belly. He had been wounded with a knife; and the opening of the wound was more than a span long; and by that time there protruded some two spans' length of his mid-gut. The opening was in the middle of his belly; and I reduced it after the bowel had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound healed in about a fortnight, and I treated him until he was better; and he lived for many years after this, carrying on as usual.
The verdict of the doctors was that he could not be healed. The remarkable thing is that I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where there was no sort of medicine; so twice a day I applied teased-out cotton wool to the wound, and carefully washed it with honey-water until he was healed.
I shall now describe one of the two kinds of special suture according to the text of Galen.
You begin at the skin, running the needle from without inwards.
When you pass it through the skin and the muscle that runs the length of the belly, leave the edge of the peritoneum on that side where the needle was introduced; and pierce the other edge of the peritoneum from within outwards through the other edge of the abdominal wall.
When you have done this, pierce the same edge of the abdominal wall from the outside inwards, leaving the edge of the peritoneum which is on that side, and pierce the other side from within outwards.
As you pierce, make the needle pass through the peritoneum to the edge of the abdominal wall that is adjacent to that part until it pierces right through the whole.
Then begin again on that same side and sew it together with the peritoneal edge on the opposite side and bring the needle out through the skin nearby. Then reintroduce into the same skin area and sew the opposite peritoneal edge with that abdominal skin edge and bring the needle out through the adjacent skin.
Do this once again and repeat until you have sewn up the whole wound after this fashion.
In short, this way of suturing is to sew with the stitch used by furriers in sewing skins; thus you stitch the peritoneum once one way with the skin edge and leave it once the other way, until you have done.
Now the manner of the second type of special stitch which Galen mentioned is this (these are his own words): that you suture it in the same way as many practitioners. That is, they suture each part to the part that corresponds naturally to it; so they join one peritoneal margin to the other and one skin margin to the other, in the manner I shall describe.
You should put the needle from without inwards, in that edge of the abdominal wall that is nearest to you, and make it pass inward through that alone, leaving out the peritoneal edges; then turn the needle round and run it from without inwards through both peritoneal edges.
Then turn it round again and make it pierce, from within outwards, the other edge of the abdominal wall, on the opposite side.
This type of suture is better than the easy general suture that has been mentioned.
These are Galen's very words.
Some have said that the suture of the abdomen may be performed with two needles, thus: you thread one thread into both and begin by introducing the needle into that part near you and carrying it through to the other side. Then you insert the other needle on the far side and bring it through to the near side, after the manner of the shoemaker's stitch.
You must understand that when the fissure is in the middle of the abdomen the sewing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
But the medical treatment of the wound comes under just the same heading as that of other wounds.
When you find a wound with its blood quite fresh, before the atmosphere has altered it, and you have reduced the intestine and have sewn it up and closed it firmly, apply to it powder to encourage fresh growth.
But if the air has altered it, then apply to it some of the available ointments until it suppurates and the threads come away and the peritoneum and abdominal wall heal; then dress it as you would any other wound, until it is better.
If you have no medicaments to hand, apply cotton wool as soon as suppuration begins, and change it twice daily, as I have taught you, until it heals. You will need no other treatment in the majority of cases when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the important organs may share the hurt of the wound, then you should dip some soft wool in moderately warm olive-oil or oil of roses and bind it round the various sites between the groin and the axillae.
If pain or gangrene be felt in the bowels—and that frequently happens—then clyster him with tepid astringent black wine, particularly if the gangrene has already set in in the bowel and has become a wound penetrating to the abdominal cavity.
You should know that if the injured bowel be the large intestine it will heal the more easily, while if it be the small its healing is more difficult.
But the part of the bowel called the jejunum is not likely to recover from an injury to it at all; and that is due to the number and size of arteries in it and to the thinness of its structure and to its nearly approaching a nerve in its character.
If what protrudes from the wound be omentum, and you find it freshly protruding, then reduce it as you do intestine.
But if some time has lapsed and it has turned green or black, you should ligate it above the site where it has gone black lest there be a haemorrhage; for the omentum contains veins and arteries.
Then cut off what is below the ligature and leave the ends of the thread hanging out from the lower part of the wound, so that it will be easy for you to draw upon it and extract it as the omentum falls away and the wound suppurates.
A note on the wound occurring in the intestine.
When a break occurs in the intestine and it is a small one, it is possible, in some men, that it may mend. For I myself saw a man who had been wounded by a spear-thrust in the abdomen. The wound was to the right of the stomach, and, being chronic, became a fistula whence issued faeces and flatus.
I set about treating him, though I had no hope of his recovery, and I continued to attend him, and eventually he recovered and the place healed over.
And when I saw that the place had healed over I was afraid for the patient lest some harm should occur in the abdominal cavity; but absolutely no harm arose from it, and he remained perfectly well and healthy, eating and drinking and engaging in coitus and going to the bath and carrying out the duties of his office.
Some men of experience have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, it should be sutured in this manner, namely: ants with large heads are taken; then the edges of the wound are brought together and one of these ants is applied by its open jaws to the two edges of the wound, and when it seizes it and closes its jaws then the head is cut off, and it will stick and will not loosen.
Then another ant is applied near the first; and you proceed after this manner with a number of ants according to the size of the wound.
Then reduce the intestine and sew up the wound; for the heads will remain sticking to the intestine until it is healed up; and no harm will come to the patient.
The intestine may also be sewn up with the fine suture which is extracted from an animal's gut and sticks to it after being threaded in a needle. The method is that the end is taken of this suture made of gut, well scraped; and to this end is fixed a fine linen thread, twisted, and then that thread is passed through the needle affixed to the suture of animal's gut, with which the intestine is sewn and then replaced in the abdominal cavity.
These kinds of suture, with the ants and with the gut, are by way of a remote hope.
But if the opening be great and wide, and especially if it be in one of the small intestines, there is no technique to deal with it, nor any cure.
On the treatment of defluxions and fistulae.
You should know that any wound or tumour, when it becomes old and chronic, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal over, but discharges pus chronically and constantly, is generally called a fistula, in whatever part of the body it may be; but we call it a defluxion.
The fistula proper is a compact hard white painless induration with a central hollow like a bird's quill; on which account some call it a quill.
At certain times it may be moist, constantly discharging pus; and again at certain times the moisture may cease; and the discharge may be greater or less; and it may be thick or thin.
I have indeed already, in their proper place, explained all these causes and their symptoms and their medical treatments.
Now here I must explain to you the operative treatment of fistula and defluxion.
You should know that a fistula may happen in any part of the body; and some fistulae reach as far as some great vein or artery or nerve or membrane or intestine or the urinary bladder, or one of the ribs or dorsal vertebrae, or some highly complex joint such as the hand or foot, while some terminate quite near some major organ, and so on.
Fistulae of this kind are among the diseases from which recovery is difficult; they are not amenable to treatment and to occupy oneself with them is labour in vain.
But if there are any fistulae which do not reach in depth the places we have mentioned, and you have some hope and expectation of curing them, and you wish to attain to recognizing these, then you take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula run in a straight line, and investigate it with that.
But if the fistula be tortuous then investigate it with a thin leaden probe; for lead is soft, so as to flex on entry and follow the curves of the fistula.
But if the fistula have multiple openings so that you cannot explore it with the probe, then make an injection into one of the openings.
The fluid you inject into that one will run to the other openings and flow out from them.
Then make a complete exploration by whatever means you can, to find out whether there be at that place a bone or nerve, and whether the fistula be deep or superficial, and whether the fistula be one with multiple openings. Inform yourself of all these points, exerting yourself to inquire of the patient whether he feels pain while you are compressing with the hand, and seeking other indications and causes of tumour that may arise.
When you have made quite certain of all these points, then proceed confidently with the treatment, namely: see if the fístula be obvious and accessible, or in a harmless situation far removed from a joint or vein or artery or tendon or any of the other places I have mentioned to you.
Then lay open the fístula by the method I have described and fetch out of it all the granulations and diseased and superfluous tissue and whatever tissue or growth be arising in its opening, and dress until healed.
If the termination of the fistula lies deep and its course be straight, you should cut it open as far in as you can and then clean out of it all diseased tissue; then use swabs soaked in corrosive, and push them to the bottom of the fistula, which is as far as you can reach with the probe.
Do this repeatedly until the caustic has destroyed all the superfluous matter remaining at the bottom of the fistula.
Then dress it with ointments that make the flesh grow sound, until it heals.
But if it does not heal thus, then cauterize it in the prescribed way.
If a bone be the cause of the fistula, and you are sure of that, then examine the fistula and open it up in the way I have told you, if there be nothing in the way like a blood-vessel or nerve or important organ, as we said.
And if the bone is laid bare to you and there be in it some corruption and blackening, then scrape it until all the corruption be removed; then put on dressings that will encourage granulation, until it be healed.
If it does not heal but discharges pus in the way it did before, then you may know that you have not yet managed to extirpate the corruption completely. Therefore you must expose it again and with the utmost diligence carry out the scraping and cleaning of it.
Then dress it; and if it heals, good; if not, then you may know that this corruption is very deep-seated in the body and out of reach, and there is nothing you can do for it but leave it to nature.
If the diseased bone be a small one, and it be possible for you to extract it, then do so with a pair of fine forceps suited to the purpose.
And if there be a number of bones then you must accurately carry out the extraction of all of them, and spare no effort to ensure that none is left.
If any ligaments lie in your way and there be no danger in incising them, then make an incision into the ligaments and whatever tissues are there, and free the bones.
If it is not possible for you to extract the bone immediately, apply over the wound something to induce suppuration, and leave it for some days until suppuration has set in in the tissues and ligaments around the bones.
Keep an eye on the wound lest the incision that you made during your operation close up; if you fear this, apply to it cotton wool soaked in sulphur beaten with olive-oil, or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or in one of the green ointments. Then, when those ligaments have been softened by putrefaction and the bones crumble, it will be easy to shift them and take them out.
If it be one large bone such as the tibia or the femur or the like, and the diseased part be only the surface, then scrape it thoroughly until all the blackness and corruption is gone, then close the wound.
If the corrupt portion be very extensive and reach to the marrow of the bone, you will not be able to avoid sawing it off and cutting it all away to the point where the corruption ends; then dress until healed.
Now I shall tell you of a defluxion that once occurred in a man's leg, as an example and a help to you in your treatment.
This man was young, about thirty years of age. He once got a pain in the leg from something internal, which so worked that eventually matter came into the leg and caused it to swell greatly, there being no external cause.
And time passed by, to the accompaniment of error on the part of the doctors, until the tumour opened and much discharge came away; and the treatment was so mismanaged that fistulae formed in the leg and many sinuses opened up, all of which discharged pus and body humours.
A whole host of doctors had been treating it for a matter of two years, not one of whom had any skill in the surgical art. Eventually he sought me.
I saw his leg, with matter coming away from the orifices in large quantities; and the man's body was wasted and jaundiced.
So I introduced a probe into one of the openings and the probe touched bone.
Then I investigated all the openings and found them all communicating with one another in all parts of the leg.
So I quickly cut down upon one of these openings until a part of the bone was laid bare, and I found it diseased, by now eaten away, and black and foul and full of holes, down to the marrow.
So I sawed off as much of the diseased bone as I had exposed and could get at.
In fact I thought that there was no more disease in the bone beyond what I had cut and sawn away, and that I had completely eradicated it.
Then I tried for a very long time to heal the wound with medicines encouraging growth of flesh, but it would not heal.
Then I again uncovered the bone, above the first opening, and found the corruption co-extensive with the bone.
So again I sawed away as much of the corruption as I could see; then I tried to heal it, but it would not heal nor unite.
Then I opened it up once more and went on cutting away the bone piecemeal and trying to heal it, and it would not heal until I had cut away about a span of bone with the marrow; then I treated it medicinally and it quickly healed over and was cured.
But it would not have been necessary to repeat the operation and the incision thus, were it not for the patient's weakness and inability to tolerate much at a time, and because of my fears for his life, since an evil faint was constantly seizing him on account of the heavy drain.
But he was completely cured, and in place of the bone there grew up firm tissue; his bodily state was sound and his strength was restored. He went about his business, and no hurt whatsoever came to him from walking.
Now in the case of a prominent bone that has been broken in any part of the body, it should be sawn off in this manner: you take a ligature and tie it to the extremity of the prominent bone and bid someone keep it stretched upward; then you put on another ligature of wool thicker than the first, tying it to the tissue that is beneath the bone, and pull on the end so that the flesh is drawn down and you lay bare of flesh the spot where you intend to saw, so that the saw does not injure the flesh.
You should place a block of wood or a board firmly beneath the bone; which done, there is no hindrance to the saw's cutting through the diseased bone.
The saw-cut should be made a little above the site of the disease in case there should be disease in the cavity of the bone that is not apparent on the surface, which might compel you to carry out the sawing a second time.
If the bone be diseased without any swelling, but it all seems the same from one part to another, and the disease be in the middle or in one segment of it, then expose it on all sides; put the block beneath, and saw it from the first side, where the disease is. When you have finished this, saw it from the other side.
The saw-cut should be at a little distance from the diseased part, as we have already said.
If the disease be in one of the phalanges, amputate the diseased phalanx and saw through the bone where it is continuous on the other (healthy) side.
If the disease be in the joint between two members, then there is nothing to be done but scraping.
If the disease be in the carpus or tarsus it is a very difficult matter treating them; you must peel off the disease in whatever way seems possible, and scrape it away and clean up the part in whatever way you can and by whatever technique is convenient for you, so long as there is no vein or nerve in your way.
Now you should know that there are a great number of cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones, varying according to the different sites and arrangements of the bones; their thickness or thinness; their greatness or smallness; their hardness or sponginess; so you should have ready for every sort of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
You should know too that when you have long experience and knowledge of the branches of this art the operations themselves may well indicate the kind of instrument needed; for the man who is skilled in the art and has seen various kinds of disease may think out for himself which instrument is suitable for each disease.
At the end of this chapter I give you illustrations of a number of instruments as types for you to copy and as a pattern upon which you can base others, God willing:
Another saw.
A large saw.
Scraper; the head of this scraper should resemble the head of a nail, stellate, engraved like a file.
What it is suitable for is to scrape the diseased heads of joints, or big broad bones.
Another scraper, small.
Broad scraper.
Firm (bow) saw. The upper bow and the blade are made of iron, the handle of box-wood, turned and firmly fixed.
Scraper with concavity.
Another scraper, fine.
Another scraper, with bent extremity.
Small scraper resembling a probe.
Another osteotome, small.
Another scraper. Its extremity is like a probe, and it is handy in many places for scraping bone.
A scraper suitable for perforated bone.
Its extremity is triangular, with sharp edges.
It is made of Indian iron, as should be all the scrapers and cutting instruments we have mentioned.
On the amputation of limbs and the sawing-off of bones.
Sometimes the extremities become gangrenous, either from an external or an internal cause. Now when you have treated this disease by medical means, ineffectively, and you see that the disease is spreading over the limb and nothing will stop it, you must cut off that limb as far as the disease has spread, so that the patient may escape death or great affliction, greater than the loss of the limb.
Now the sign of the victim of this state is that the limb goes black, so that you might think it were burnt with fire, or, after the blackening, it putrefies, and the putrefaction spreads to parts adjacent to that limb and begins to attack the whole body; cut it away as soon as you can.
So must you do if the disease is caused by the bite of some dangerous reptile such as the marine scorpion, viper, or venomous spider, and so on.
If the disease or bite be at the tip of the finger, cut off the finger, giving the disease no opportunity to spread to the rest of the hand.
Similarly, if it attacks the hand, cut if off at the wrist, giving the disease no opportunity to spread and attack the two bones of the forearm.
Similarly, if it attacks the forearm, cut it off at the elbow through the joint itself.
If the disease passes onward and you perceive that it has reached the region of the shoulder, by no means cut the shoulder, for that will be the death of the patient; use any treatment but that, as best you may.
In the same manner act in regard to the foot when the disease attacks a toe; namely, amputate the toe through one of the interphalangeal joints.
If the disease attacks the tarsus then amputate the whole foot; and if it ascends toward the knee, amputate the leg at the knee-joint.
If it be that the disease has passed on above the knee, there is nothing of any avail in this case but to leave it, and for the patient to resign himself to death.
Now the way to amputate or saw off a limb is to bind a ligature round below the site and another above; an assistant draws the one downward and another assistant draws the upper ligature upward; while you dissect away the tissues between the two ligatures with a broad scalpel until it is laid bare of flesh; then it should be cut or sawn.
You must place linen dressings on every side lest the saw touch a part that is sound and thus cause the patient additional pain and inflammation.
If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, cauterize the place as quickly as possible, or apply to it one or other of the styptic powders; then continue until finished.
Then bind up the mutilated limb with a suitable bandage and dress until healed.
Now I shall relate to you an example; what I am going to tell you is exactly what happened to a certain man's foot. He had a blackening of the foot, with a burning like that of fire.
The disease, to begin with, was in one toe, but it went on to involve the whole foot.
When the man saw the disease spreading in the limb and felt the violent pain and burning, he hastened of his own accord to amputate it at the joint, and he got better.
After a long time had passed the very same kind of disease arose in the forefinger of his hand.
He came to me, and I attempted to suppress the superfluity with remedies that I applied to the hand, after purging his body; but the superfluity was not to be suppressed and began to spread to the second finger, and eventually the whole hand was involved in the disease.
He urged me to cut off his hand, but I did not wish to do this, hoping I should be able to overcome the superfluity, and also fearing he would die at the amputation of his hand, for the man's strength was on the decline.
When he despaired of me he went back to his own country, and I then heard that he had gone and cut off his whole hand, and got well.
I narrate this story as help against this kind of malady when it occurs; and as guidance for you to take and act upon.
On the treatment of sinuses and the way to irrigate them.
When an abscess occurs in any of the fleshy parts and becomes chronic and eventually collects pus, and then it breaks open or is perforated, and all the contained matter comes out and the site is left hollow, like a vessel, and the overlying skin thinned like a rag, but the suppuration has not gone so far as to involve bone or tendon or ligament—and hence it merits the name of 'sinus' and is not called a fistula.
But if it goes on until the disease involves any of these parts it is then called a fistula or defluxion.
The treatment of it will be to cut away all that skin with a circular incision; specially if it be thinned and has become like a rag, and you are sure that it will not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.
But if you are in hope of its adhering, and the corruption has not reached that point, and there is in the skin some thickness of flesh, then treat it by irrigation.
The procedure is that you examine the sinus, and if it be large and the purulent discharge from it smell bad, then irrigate it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, honey and verdigris, equal parts of each, mixed in a vessel and heated on the fire until the compound thickens and assumes the consistency of honey.
Then take as much as you need and dilute it with water and honey, and with this irrigate the sinus and bind up the opening, leaving the compound inside for two hours.
Then get it out by pressure. Do this for several days until the sinus is clean and the smell disappears.
It may be irrigated with water of ashes if the medicine is not at hand. For that, you take ashes of vine or of oak, and put water upon them; then clarify the liquor and with it irrigate the sinus until you are sure it is thoroughly clean.
But if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then irrigate him with water and honey with which a little pounded verdigris has been mixed; or irrigate with honey and wine mingled; the value of the honey lies in its cleansing and washing, while the wine closes up the sinus, specially if it be a wine which has some dryness and astringency.
When you have done this several times and you are sure that the sinus is clean of diseased matter, then irrigate it with those compounds that will encourage granulation in it.
For example, you may take a little Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and some astringent wine; or irrigate it with some of the other ointments and medicines whose prescriptions we have recorded in the treatise on ointments.
If the opening of the sinus be too narrow for the nozzle of the syringe, open it up slightly with the knife, or put in it a pad steeped in Egyptian ointment or vermilion ointment, until it is dilated.
On the other hand, if the opening be wide, bring the edges together with a suture, and leave of it sufficient width that the syringe may be only just introduced.
In the same way, if the opening from which the discharge flows be raised up, then incise it at its lowest part so that the discharge may flow downward out of it; for when the discharge collects at the bottom of the sinus it prevents the formation of flesh in it.
If you cannot open it up as you wish at the lower point, then try to set the part in whatever position you conveniently can to facilitate the discharge of pus, and try to ensure that no pus is held up in it.
But the dressing over the sinus opening you may constantly remove, so that the pus collected behind it may come out and so that you may know whether there be much or little ichor, and whether digested or not.
And at the same time investigate the site of the sinus itself to see whether the patient feels any pain in it or no pain, and whether there be any swelling in it or not.
Then when your treatment has reached such a point that you see that there is only a little superficial matter coming out round the mouth of the sinus, you may know that the sinus has closed up or is near to closing up. Then you may unbandage it the next day or the third day, and when the wound is unbandaged make a change of dressing and ointment.
But if, after a long while, the sinus discharges a thin ichor, do not despair of its closing up, for its healing is near. For there are some men whose wounds are slow in healing, and some are the opposite.
If, after many days, undigested pus is discharged you may know that the sinus has not closed. If the closing of the sinus be delayed and it be a long affair, make the medicines dryer; let them be medicines that have some humidity in their substance but dryness in their potency, such as Palm ointment with the addition of excess of rock-alum.
A most efficacious treatment is to take Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and sprinkle over it old wine of even consistency. Then knead together, and use that.
Then knead together, and use that. The same sort of thing may be done with honey if you have no Palm ointment at hand; if you heat the honey to a thick consistency and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and incense of juniper and beat them all up together and sprinkle on the honey while it is heating on the fire, spread on lint and bind over the sinus; or spread on it honey heated to a thickness, and over that sprinkle powdered aromatic roots, and over these place a dressing that you bandage on.
Sometimes also in a case of this sort long birthwort and the root of the blue iris and vetch flour and centaury are usable, either separately or mixed, beaten up together, sifted and scattered into honey as I described; use them thus.
But if the sinus be chronic, and it does not heal with this treatment, then you may know that there is corruption at the bottom of it, which has affected the bones or motor nerves or ligaments; the treatment then is that of fistula as already given.
On the treatment of paronychia and broken nails; and on the amputation of a superfluous finger; and the separation of webbed fingers.
Paronychia is a growth of flesh under the nail of the thumb or big toe; it may also occur in the other fingers and toes. When it is chronic and the treatment of it is neglected, it comes up as an abscess, or corrupts and generates pus until it eats away the root of the nail. Often it rots it entirely, and often the disease reaches the bone and gives rise to foetor and broadens the tip of the finger and makes it livid in colour.
When you have treated it with those means mentioned in their place, and your treatment is ineffective, you must excise all the superfluous growth from the nail and then cauterize the wound, for in this case cauterization is a great help.
But if the bone be healthy and the nail also healthy, and the in-turned angle of the nail has pressed the flesh inwards and begun to stab it and injure it, you should pass a thin probe beneath the corner of the nail that presses into the flesh, and raise it up and carefully cut away that flesh and apply caustic to the remainder, until it is all gone; then dress with ointments until cured.
But if it should be that the disease has already begun to involve bone, that bone should be excised and removed; for it will never heal while there remains any diseased bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading in the finger, amputate it at one of the joints, as has been previously mentioned; then dress it until it is healed.
If a laceration or bruising happen to the nail, with violent pain, you should first bleed the patient and then cut away the nail with a sharp scalpel, a swerving cut from top to bottom. But be careful not to cut into the nail-bed, for you will give the patient violent pain and it will cause a growth of superfluous flesh at the place. Then dress the part with sedative dressings.
A superfluous finger growing on the hands of some men sometimes is all flesh, sometimes contains a bone, sometimes has a nail.
Some of them arise at the root of a finger, or on one of the phalanges of a finger, and the latter do not move, while those that arise from the root of a finger do sometimes move.
That which is purely fleshy is easily removed; you cut if off at the root with a broad scalpel.
But the treatment of that which arises at the root of a finger is difficult; you should avoid amputating.
In the case of one growing from the finger at a phalangeal joint, you should first cut through the flesh down to the bone with a circular incision; then saw the bone through, with one of the saws that suit the purpose; then dress it until it heals.
As for webbing of the fingers one to another, that occurs very frequently. It may be either congenital or from the healing of a wound or burn or the like.
You have to cut the web away until the fingers are brought back to their original form; then interpose between them a pad or piece of material soaked in oil of roses, to prevent them from rapidly joining together and to keep them apart; or you can put between them a thin sheet of lead until the healing takes place as it should.
Similarly, if one of the fingers becomes joined to the palm of the hand, cut through the adhesion according to the form it takes, and with proper regard for the shape of the member.
On cutting for varices.
Varices are thick twisted veins filled with melancholic superfluities. They occur in most parts of the body, but generally in the legs, particularly in the legs of couriers and ploughmen and porters.
First you must purge the body free from black bile, several times, strongly. Then venesect the patient in the basilic vein.
The treatment with the knife is of two kinds: one is to incise and bring out all the black blood, the other is to draw out the vein and extract it bodily.
The incision is done thus: the leg is first well fomented with hot water to liquefy the thick foul blood; then bind up the patient's leg well from the upper part of his thigh to below the knee; then make an ample incision into the vein in one, two, or three places. Then with your hand press the black blood upward from the lower part and downward from the upper part of the leg and draw off as much blood as you see suffices or as the patient's strength can bear.
Then bind up, and bid him abstain from foods that give rise to black bile.
The evacuation and venesection should be repeated whenever the veins fill up again to the patient's hurt.
Extraction is carried out in this way: the patient's leg is shaved if it is very hairy; then bring him to the bath and foment the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled. Or if there be no bath available let him take violent exercise until the limb gets hot.
Then make a longitudinal incision in the skin over the vein, either at the upper end of it near the knee or at the lower end near the ankle.
Then with hooks open up the skin and dissect away round the vein on each side until it is laid open to view.
When it is visible you will see it red almost to the point of blackness; and when it is freed from the skin you will see it look like a cord.
Then pass beneath it a probe to lift it up, and when it is clear of the skin hold it with a blunt smooth hook.
Then make another incision near by, three fingers distant; then dissect away the overlying skin until it comes to view; then raise it with a probe as before and lift it with a second hook as you did at first.
Then make yet another incision or several if need be; then draw out the vessel at the lowest incision near the ankle and cut it through. Then pull it and draw it out until it emerges from the second incision.
Then draw it towards the incision above that and so on until you draw it out of the third incision (or) the uppermost, until it is all extracted; then cut it off.
But if it does not respond to your attempts to draw and extract it, pass in a needle with a strong double thread and ligate it and draw it up; and introduce a probe beneath it, and twist it all round until it comes out; but be careful lest it break; for if it break the total extraction of it will be very difficult for you and harm will thereby come to the patient.
When you have got it all out, apply to the incisions wool soaked in wine and oil of roses, or olive-oil, and dress it till it be healed.
If the varix be contorted, with twists and turns from side to side and not in a straight line, as we said, then you should cut down along both sides of the twisted part and the places where it is tortuous, then catch it up with hooks and extract it whole.
Be careful in incising over it that you do not cut into or injure the vein, for this will render the extraction difficult; therefore be most careful.
The lancet for cutting upon a varix.
It is not bent like other hooks, and its extremity must be blunt so as to not injure the vein. It should be of a broad curve and smooth, for if it is fine-pointed its fineness may cut the vein; rather it should be quite thick, as we said.
On the extraction of the Medina vein.
This kind of vein occurs in the leg in hot countries such as the Hejaz and the lands of the Arabs and in hot arid infertile countries.
It also often occurs in other parts of the body beside the legs.
The origin of it is a corruption taking place beneath the skin in the same way that round-worms and worms and gourd-worms arise in the inward parts of the body; also the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.
The sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this vein is a violent inflammation in the leg; then the place swells up and blisters; then the vein begins to extrude at the blistered place as if it were a plant-stem or an animal.
When its extremity has appeared it should be wound and tied round a little piece of lead, from one to two drachms in weight, which you leave hanging from the leg.
Then as fast as any of it issues from the leg, wrap it in the lead, and if there be plenty of it cut off part and tie the rest of it; do not cut it right down until it has all come out; for if you cut it right down it will contract and draw back into the flesh and produce at the place an abscess and suppuration and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it should be treated gently, and drawn out slowly until the very extremity of it emerges and not the least bit of it remains in the body.
In some cases the vein comes out five or ten spans in length; indeed I have heard of one twenty spans long that came out from a certain man.
If it breaks during your treatment of it, then pass a probe into the hole and open it up with a long incision longitudinally, until all the contained matter is evacuated; and try to make the place suppurate with medicines for a few days, then treat as an abscess.
Sometimes also this vein is found branching, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself; and in this case there are many openings and a branch comes out of each.
The treatment is as mentioned above in the section.
On incision for the worm arising beneath the skin, called 'the cattle disease'.
This complaint is called by us in some regions 'the cattle disease' since it frequently happens to cattle. It is in fact a small solitary worm generated between the skin and the flesh, that creeps all over the body, both up and down; it can be felt as it creeps from one part to another until it breaks out at a place where it can break through the skin, and out it comes.
It arises from the putrefaction of certain humours as do worms, round-worms and gourd-worms in the abdomen.
Part of the harm that may be expected of it is that when it creeps about the body and goes up to the head and reaches the eye it may make an opening in the eye and come out and destroy the eye; this frequently happens.
If you wish to treat this and extract it, it must be done while it is creeping about and can be felt. You must tie a tight tourniquet above and below it, then cut down upon it and extract it.
But if it burrows into the tissues and you cannot locate it, then apply the actual cautery to the place until you have burnt the worm. The greatest damage to be feared from it is damage to the eye, as we have said.
So if you see that it has entered the head and is near the eye, then bind a strong bandage over the forehead beneath it, then cut down upon it and draw it out. It is important also for the patient to take care to cleanse his body with laxative medicines from all corrupt and evil humours. He should also avoid all foods giving rise to putrefaction.
CHAPTER NINETY-THREE. On incision for the disease known as 'flitting disease'.
The disease known in our region as 'the flitting disease' is a pain arising in a limb and then passing from limb to limb.
I have personally seen it as I shall describe to you: I was called to a woman patient in a country district, who uncovered her arm and showed me a small inflation of the cephalic vein. After I had waited a while I saw the swelling creep like a worm along the forearm, ascending towards her shoulder, with the greatest possible speed, as of quicksilver running from place to place.
Then the pain left that place and settled in the elbow.
Then I waited a while and the pain ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm.
Then she related to me that it used to pass all round her body as I had seen it. I was amazed at the speed with which it migrated from one part to another, as I had never before seen this disease in this form, though I had seen many who had a pain that passed from limb to limb; but never with my own eyes had I seen anything like what I saw in this woman.
The only opinion I could form of it was that it was due to the woman's being of the dwellers in the wilds, dry of body, with outstanding veins, and hence that moving vapour was perceptible.
But it follows then that it does not appear in that manner in people leading a leisured life, with humid bodies and hidden veins.
When you want to cure this, and the patient feels the pain of it, and if you observe the appearance we have described, then tie a bandage round above and beneath it as quickly as possible and cut down on it so that the vapour enclosed there may come out; and cauterize the place.
But if there is nothing visible to you then treat by purging of the body and by medicines dispelling and getting rid of flatus, such as foetid pills and pills of sagapenon and the like.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary both as to types and as to the different parts of the body pierced by them. They differ thus as to type: some are big and some are small; some with hollow heads and some with solid; some of them have three angles and some four; some have tongues; some have spikes.
Now the signs when the arrow has struck the brain, and penetrated the bone and injured the meninges covering the brain, are these: there arise from that a violent headache and vertigo and giddiness and a redness in the eye, and a redness of the tongue, and convulsion and mental confusion and bilious vomit; perhaps also blood comes out of the nose or from the ears; often also the speech is affected and the voice is lost; also there comes out of the site of the wound a white fluid which resembles gruel, from which there flows something like the juice of meat.
If you observe these signs, avoid treating the patient and extraction of the arrow if it has not come out.
The signs of an arrow in the heart are: nearness to the left breast; the patient feels it as if it were fixed in something solid, not hollow; often also there will be imparted to the arrow a pulsating movement; and black blood will issue from the wound; and after this follow coldness of the extremities and a cold sweat and unconsciousness; then you may know that death is surely on its way.
The sign of an arrow that has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; also the vessels that lie along the neck swell up and the patient changes colour, breathes heavily, and seeks to inhale fresh air very strongly.
But if the arrow strike the pleura then it will be close to the small ribs and he will breathe deeply with much pain and heaving of the chest, and all parts of his shoulders will be agitated. If the arrow hits the liver, there ensues violent pain, and blood flows from the wound, resembling the liver in its redness.
If the arrow strikes the stomach, often undigested food comes out of the wound and renders the case obvious.
If the arrow wounds the belly and is fixed in it, and from the wound there comes excrement or omentum or torn bowel, there is no hope in treatment nor in extracting the arrow.
If the arrow has hit the urinary bladder, and urine comes out and some of the bladder protrudes and the patient has violent pain, then you may know that the wound is mortal.
But as for the other parts, such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, dorsal vertebrae, collar-bone, hip, leg, and the like, in most cases they will heal if the arrow does not happen to strike an artery or nerve, and if the arrow is not poisoned.
Now I will relate to you certain cases of arrow wounds that I have seen, so that you may be guided thereby to your own methods of treatment.
For example, once an arrow struck a man at the corner of his eye near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side beneath the lobe of his ear, and he got well, and his eye was none the worse.
Also I extracted from a Jew another arrow that had pierced the orbit beneath the lower eyelid; the arrow had sunk out of sight and I could take hold only of the tiny extremity of it which is secured to the shaft; but it was a big arrow from a compound bow, the iron tip four-sided, very smooth without barbs.
The Jew recovered, nor did any ill befall his eye.
I also extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian. It was an Arab arrow, one of those with two barbs; and I cut down upon it between the two jugulars (for it lay deep in the throat), and worked gently at it until I extracted it; and the Christian was saved and recovered.
I also extracted another arrow from a man, that had struck him in the abdomen, and our opinion was that he would certainly die from it. But when it had remained in him for the space of thirty days or thereabouts, and his condition was unimpaired, I cut down upon the arrow and manoeuvred it out and extracted it; and he recovered, nor did any harm befall him.
I also saw a man who had been struck in the back by an arrow and the wound had closed over it; and when the space of seven years had elapsed the arrow came out at the root of the hip.
And I saw a woman who had been struck in the abdomen by an arrow and the wound healed with the arrow remaining in it, and her condition was unimpaired; she felt no harm from it and her natural functions were not harmed.
And I saw a man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and it had healed over, and he did not feel much pain from it. And many such have I seen.
I once drew out an arrow from one of the officers of the State, that had struck him in the middle of the nose and was inclining a little to the right, and the whole arrow was buried.
I was called to treat him three days after he had received the arrow wound; and I found the arrow wound very narrow.
I explored it with a fine probe but did not find it; but the patient felt a pricking and a pain beneath the right ear, and I hoped that the pricking was due to the arrow.
So I applied a poultice to the spot, a poultice with power to draw out and cause suppuration, desiring that the place should swell and that a sign to indicate the arrow should appear so that I could cut down upon it.
But nothing happened at that place to indicate that the arrow had come through to there; so I persevered with poulticing it for many days; yet nothing fresh manifested itself and the wound healed up meanwhile, and the patient despaired for a time of its extraction.
Then one day he felt the arrow inside his nose, and he told me of this; so for a number of days I applied a caustic medicine to the wound until it opened.
I explored it, and felt the slim end of the arrow which is fastened to the shaft; then I enlarged the opening of the wound by the use of the caustic until the tip of the arrow was plainly visible to me. About four months passed.
Then when the wound was enlarged and I was able to introduce forceps into it I pulled on it and moved it, but it would not come out. And I went on skilfully and gently trying for it with various instruments until one day I caught hold of it with a pair of strong forceps (their shape will be described at the end of the chapter) and drew it out; then dressed the wound.
The medical men judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed up and the patient made a complete recovery nor did he suffer any harm.
Now I shall tell you the method of extracting certain arrows so that you may take it as a guide and an analogy for others that I have not mentioned; since all parts and details of this art cannot be comprehended in any description, nor can any book include them.
A skilful worker will form a judgement on much, from little; and on what is not present from what is before him; and he will think out a new method and a new instrument for an unaccustomed case when it occurs in the practice of this art.
So I would state that arrows come out from the parts of the body they have transfixed, in two ways: either by drawing out from the site of entry; or from the opposite side.
An arrow that comes out by the track of its entry: the arrow may be visible, standing out from a fleshy part, in which case it may be extracted by pulling.
If it does not respond to traction immediately it strikes, you must leave it for a few days until the surrounding tissues have suppurated, when the pulling and extraction of it will be made easy.
Similarly if it has stuck fast in a bone and will not come out, leave this also for a few days, repeatedly pulling on it and shifting it day by day, and then it will come out.
But if it will not come out after some days, you will have to drill away the bone from all round with a fine drill so as to make room for the arrow; then draw on it and pull it out.
If the arrow is buried in some part of the body and is quite lost to sight, explore for it with a probe, and if you can feel it then draw it out with any suitable instrument.
But if you cannot get at it on account of the narrowness of the wound and the depth at which the arrow is, and there be no bone nor nerve nor blood-vessel, then cut round it until the wound be sufficiently wide to enable you to take hold of it and extract it.
And if it have two barbs by which it is held, free them from the adherent flesh all round, in any way you can; or, if you cannot free the tissues, try skilfully to break off the two barbs and twist them about until the arrow comes free.
Whenever you try to extract an arrow from any part, employ a twisting motion of your hand with the forceps in all directions until you free it; and use the utmost gentleness not to break the arrow and thus make it hard to draw it out and remove it.
If you are unable to get it out at once then leave it for some days until the tissues that surround it putrefy, then return to it, for then the extraction will be easy; and if haemorrhage interfere use the remedies prescribed in the chapter dealing with that.
Exercise the utmost care not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve or tendon; and employ the greatest skill in freeing the arrow; it should be done gently and unhurriedly and with perseverance, as I have told you.
When extracting an arrow you should place the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is more convenient; but if you cannot do this then let him be in whatever position is possible for you.
The arrow that is to be extracted from the opposite side either has some part protruding through or else the tip of the arrow gives rise to a palpable swelling just beneath the skin and you see it sticking out; then cut down upon it; the incision should be wide enough to admit the forceps. Then pull on it, for the extraction of it will be easy.
If it is stuck in bone, twist it round with your hand until the arrow makes an impression in the bone and opens up a way for itself; then pull it.
If it does not come out, let it alone for some days, and repeat until it does come out.
If the arrow-shaft be in the wound, then thrust the arrow out with that.
But if the shaft has fallen out, and you wish to employ thrusting, introduce down to it the hollow instrument whose cavity will enter upon the ferrule of the arrow, then push it forward with that.
If the arrow be hollow, thrust it forward with an instrument that will enter into the cavity, for the exit of the arrow will thereby be made easy.
If the arrow be poisoned you must, if you can, cut out in a circle all the flesh into which the poison has entered; then treat it with what is appropriate.
If the arrow that has struck be in the chest or abdomen or in the urinary bladder or in the flank and it be close enough for you to explore it with the probe and you can cut down upon it, then do so, but beware of cutting into a blood-vessel or nerve. Then remove the arrow. Afterwards suture the wound, if suture be necessary, and dress it until it heals.
Forceps for extracting arrows.
The extremities resemble the bill of a bird and are engraved like a file so as not to lose grip when you close them upon an arrow or some other object.
They are made in several kinds, large, small, or medium, all according to the bigness or smallness of the arrow and the breadth or narrowness of the wound.
The extremity is solid like a probe, to facilitate entry into, and pushing, the hollow arrow.
On venesection.
There are sixteen of them in the head, and they are: two pulsating vessels behind the ears that are called the two occipitals; the two external arteries in the temples; and the two veins in the two internal angles of the eyes, called the vessels of sight; and the vein running up the middle of the forehead; and the vein situated at the tip of the nose; and the two jugular veins in the neck; and the two veins in the upper lip and the two in the lower lip; these being the veins known as 'the four vessels'; and two veins beneath the tongue. As for the veins that are bled in the arm and hand, they are five. One is the cephalic, which is on the outer side; popularly they call it the 'headvein'; then there is the 'blue-black', that is, the median vein, which is made up of a branch from the basilic and a branch from the cephalic; popularly they call that the 'body-vein'; then the basilic vein; this is the one situated on the inner side and is termed also the axillary vein, but popularly it is called the 'belly-vein'; and then the cord of the arm; this is situated over the radius and is the one that is contiguous to it; this is the one that is clearly visible on the thumb. And the salvatella which is the vein between the little and ring fingers; it has two branches.
There are also three veins in the leg and foot; one of these is the sciatic vein on the outer aspect; the second is the saphena situated near the heel on the inner aspect; and there is the external saphena situated near the heel on the outer aspect. And there are three veins, counterparts to these, in the other leg.
Venesection of the two veins behind the ears. Bleeding from both of these will give relief in cases of chronic catarrh, migraine and chronic foul pustules, and scabs of the head.
The method of venesecting these two is as I shall now describe: the patient's head should be shaved and the hinder part, in the region of the two veins, should be strongly chafed with a rough cloth; then the patient should bind his neck with his turban until the two veins are visible; their position is behind the ears in the two flattened places of the head; feel for them with your finger and when you feel their pulsation beneath your finger then mark the place with ink.
Then take a knife-scalpel, known as a lancet, and insert it beneath the vessel into the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone; then lifting with your hand both vessel and skin make an incision dividing both skin and vein; the length of the incision should be about two fingers side by side; then draw off the quantity of blood you wish.
Then bind them up with dressings and leave it until healed.
The incision and cauterization of these two vessels has been discussed earlier in the book.
The section of the two arteries in the temples gives relief for chronic migraine and severe headache and constant ophthalmia and the flow of acrid superfluities into the eyes.
Now the manner of incising them is as I shall describe: the patient should bind his neck with a sash until the vessels stand out clearly to the eye and their pulsation is manifest under your finger; then mark with ink.
Then with your forefinger raise the skin over the vessel and introduce a lancet beneath and lift up the vein and divide it as you did the other two; and draw off as much blood as you need.
Then loosen the band round the patient's neck and put your finger on the vein for a while; then apply cotton wool and a pad, bandage securely, and leave until it heals.
They and their incision and extraction have been mentioned earlier in the book.
Venesection of the vein in the forehead is, after venesection of the cephalic, a relief to chronic diseases of the face such as pustules and scabs and erysipelas.
Now I shall relate to you the method of cutting: you bind the patient's neck until the vessel stands out; then you take the instrument called the 'pickaxe'.
The spike in the head of the instrument you place on the vessel itself and then strike with a comb or some similar thing; and let the blood flow to the extent you wish; then loosen the band round the neck and bandage the vein until healed.
Sometimes it is opened with a broad scalpel; the scalpel, however, should not have a sharp point like other scalpels but should be a little broader at the tip, and the vein is cut obliquely, because the bone is close and the scalpel, if it is too fine, may be broken on it.
Venesection of the two lachrymal veins gives relief in diseases of the eyes such as granular conjunctiva and inflammation and pannus, and in diseases of the face.
Now this is the method of incising: the patient binds a sash round his throat, then you cut open both veins, standing in front of him.
The incision should be oblique, slightly longitudinal, with a small, rather broad scalpel, for in this place there is no flesh; so if the knife have too narrow a point it may be broken on the bone.
Then let flow what blood you wish, put cotton wool on both, tie for one night, then loosen.
Venesection of the vein of the nose helps in acute fevers, in violent headache, and in diseases of the face such as the red pustules that arise on the nose, especially if they are chronic.
This is how you make the incision: the patient binds his neck and then you hold his nose with your left hand and take a long fine scalpel and stick it in the middle of the very lobule of the nose, perpendicularly in the nasal septum (for the vein is not obvious at that spot) and blood will immediately flow out.
You should advance the scalpel a little and cause the blood to flow as required; then bandage for one night, for it will quickly heal.
Venesection of the jugular veins helps tightness of breath and the early stage of elephantiasis, and the melancholic diseases arising on the surface of the skin, such as the black vitiligo and impetigo and malignant ulcers and cancrum oris.
Now the way to venesect them is for the patient to bind his neck below them both with a band; let the operator stand behind the patient and let the patient be seated upon a chair.
Then incise the vein longitudinally with a rather wide opening; then let a moderate amount of blood, or according to what you think necessary; then do the same with the other vein.
Then loosen the band and tie the veins with a moderate pressure lest the patient be suffocated; leave him until the next day and the wound will be healed.
The four veins of the lips: venesection of them is effective, second to section of the cephalic vein, for pustules on the mouth and rotting of the gums and malignant ulcers and fissures of the lips and for malignant ulcer in the nose and round about.
The way to venesect is to seat the patient in front of you and bind a sash round his neck, then roll back his lips and look for the two veins, one of which you will see to the left and the other to the right; their dark colour will show them up against the lip and also the fact that round them are fine dark veins; so cut down upon both, dividing them.
But if you are in doubt about the matter and are not sure what they are, set about incising the largest and most obvious.
Do the same with the two veins in the upper lip.
The two veins under the tongue: their venesection is, after section of the cephalic, of good effect in the quinsy arising in the throat from disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
The way to venesect them is to seat the patient before you in the sunlight and raise his tongue, and look, and you will see beneath the tongue one vein on each side, blackish in colour.
Cut them; but be careful not to go too far in your incision, for beneath them lie arteries from which there may be haemorrhage.
The three veins that are opened in the elbow are the veins which universal custom has used for bloodletting. There are two ways of venesecting these: either by piercing with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel or a rather fine olivary; or by cutting with a knife-edged scalpel, the lancet whose figure follows. The broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.
As you see, it should be broad so as to serve for opening hollow, full, outstanding, obvious and thick veins, and those containing turbid blood.
This scalpel is less broad and finer-pointed. It is suitable for venesecting fine veins that contain thin jaundiced blood.
The basilic vein, which is one of these three vessels, helps, when cut, by extracting blood from disorders below the throat and neck, in the parts neighbouring the chest and abdomen.
When one venesects it one must be careful and wary of it, for beneath the vein is an artery, so that if one is inaccurate and sticks the scalpel in too far one will cut the artery and cause a haemorrhage; therefore venesection of it should not be done with a transfixing scalpel but should be an incision with the lancet.
If the basilic vein is not clearly discernible, leave it and turn to another, or look for a branch of it; or venesect the brachial cord instead, for that is evident; incise it with the lancet as we have said.
But if you wish to open the basilic vein itself you should, before you bandage the arm, palpate the place till the site of pulsation is found; then mark it with ink; then bind the arm and cut the vein obliquely with the lancet as we said, and take care that the stroke fall some way from the artery.
If, when tying the bandage, you see a swelling in the place that you have marked with ink, that swelling is the inflation of the artery, so avoid it.
And if, on section, you see the blood spurt out like a child's urine, and it is clear and red, then you may know that it is arterial blood; so then be quick and put your finger upon it for a long while; then remove your finger and if the bleeding stops, as it often will, then bind up the arm and leave it.
Caution the patient against neglecting it; let him be careful and not move it for some days, until it heals.
But if the bleeding is not stayed but resists your treatment and you have no medicament there at the time, then cut the vessel through if you can see it; for the two ends will contract and the haemorrhage will stop. Or else take a pistachio nut shell and split it and take one half and bind it over the site of the haemorrhage with a pad and bandage until next day.
The bleeding may stop; if not, then treat by those means mentioned previously, namely the application of styptic powders.
It is not difficult in most cases to stop the bleeding, because the wound is small and it is easy to bandage the arm.
So get to know it. Venesection of the median vein results in drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; this being due to the fact, as we said, that it is composed of a branch of the cephalic and a branch of the basilic veins.
The venesector should be very careful in opening it because there is a nerve beneath; and if he takes the scalpel too deep and hits that nerve it will cause stupor, the healing of which will be difficult and perhaps even impossible. Generally this nerve can be felt, but if in some persons it lies hidden and is slender and not discernible, then you should make your venesection an incision with the lancet and diligently avoid the nerve.
If the vein lies between two nerves you should cut it longitudinally.
The cephalic vein: section of it is effective in drawing blood from the head and in diseases of the eyes.
Particularly in this vein you ought, if you wish to incise it, to make your incision by puncturing with the olivary or the broad myrtle-leaf scalpel, for this is the safest of all veins as there is neither artery nor nerve beneath.
It will not injure it, if at the first cut you miss the vein, to repeat the incision several times; except that in some people it will sometimes swell up if the section is not made at the first stroke; nevertheless that swelling will do him no harm.
First you should know that venesection may be employed either for the preservation of health or in cases of disease. When used for the preservation and maintenance of health and for guarding against the occurrence of disease, the venesection should be in one of the three vessels at the elbow, cephalic, median, or basilic; and it must be performed at the beginning of spring when the signs of repletion appear.
The venesection should be done on a Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours of the day have passed.
On the other hand, venesection administered for diseases has no fixed hour but when need and necessity arise, either by night or by day, at any hour, in any season.
Children should not be venesected until their fourteenth year, nor should you venesect old men of over sixty years.
When anyone has decided to be bled, for whatever reason, first of all his bowels must be purged with a gentle enema if they contain much excrement, lest at the venesection putrid superfluities be drawn from the bowels into the veins, that might harm the chief parts of the body.
No one suffering from indigestion or surfeit or drunkenness should be venesected until recovered from these; nor a dropsical patient. Beware also of venesection after stomach-trouble or vomiting or diarrhoea or much intercourse or fatigue or exercise or sleeplessness or fasting and anything else that diminishes the strength both bodily and spiritual.
Then, beforehand, see to the refining of the humours, if the blood be thick, by means of food and drink and medicines, if that is practicable for him.
Then, if there is no contra-indication, let him enter the bath; or let him take a little exercise to make the blood thin.
Then perform the venesection in the early part of the day, as we have said.
Let him endeavour on that day to have his mind free from all such evil spiritual affections as anxiety, anger, or fear; and from all bodily affections such as excessive fatigue and weariness and intercourse and the like.
There should also be in the place where he is sitting such things as are customary for men to enjoy, such as various perfumes, aromatics, and music, and the like, as each one may.
Then the venesector should sit on a cushion raised above the cushion of him whose vein is to be opened.
Then let him stretch out his arm, and let the venesector chafe it two or three times with his hand; then he should bind a bandage round it by means of thongs twisted two or three times.
The ligature should be moderately tight, for any other sort of ligature, be it too tight or too loose, will hinder the flow of blood.
After putting on the tourniquet the patient about to be venesected should chafe his own hands together until the veins swell up and become obvious.
Then the venesector should wipe over his knife with a little olive-oil, preferably old. Then he should place the forefinger of his left hand on the vessel itself below the place where he wishes to cut, lightly, so that the vein does not slip away and elude the stroke; for there are some veins that you may find like cords slipping away at venesection, while others are filled with flatus and when the knife is applied to them they contract under it and deceive the operator and the knife fails to open the vein or makes only a narrow opening.
Wherefore it behoves the venesector to be firm and deliberate in all these cases.
Then he should apply the knife and if the vein is opened first time, good; but if not, let him repeat a little lower down or a little above, quickly, if the place does not swell.
If it does swell or the patient be anxious, then leave him for a day or two and do not bandage, for that might perhaps provoke an abscess; nor let him go to the bath.
Then if he likes, let the venesection be repeated.
If the knife has made an opening but it is small and the flow of blood is feeble and you fear that the amount of blood you require will not come out, then gently insert the knife again straight into the same opening and widen it a little. Do this speedily before the place swells up; for in many people the place swells up at once from a small opening.
But if you see it swell up, on no account make another incision for it will be ineffectual; but apply to it a little lees of oil, for that will facilitate the flow of blood; it is superior in this situation to the oil itself and to all other unguents.
Therefore use lees of oil in all cases of venesection when the flow of blood is hindered. The great theriac and shakhzanaya both have the same effect, for when the blood is thick it is rendered thin and running.
If there occur a big tumour at the site of venesection, as often happens, especially with a man who has not previously undergone venesection or if the opening in the vein be small, then quickly apply to the place a sponge soaked in lukewarm salt and water and bandage it for a while, then it will go down.
You should do this after the blood has gone out altogether from the same vessel or from another one.
If there remain after some days some discoloration or greenness at the site it will not hurt; if you like, apply some solution of myrrh and aloes, or juice of penny-royal or something similar.
Often in section of the basilic vein there occurs tumour and swelling.
Put your hand upon it, and if you find that it sinks when pressed then it is a harmful swelling; be careful not to apply to it any of the things we have told you; for often arterial blood comes from it.
But apply a poultice with some styptic qualities, to harden the place; then treat in the usual way until healed.
Now in each case you should extract blood in proportion to the person's strength and to the prevailing colour of the blood.
If the blood be black, let it flow until it becomes red; in the same way, if you see it is thick, let it run until it is thin; and again, if it be sharp, until its sharpness is gone.
In the case that is plethoric, robust, and requiring venesection just the once, the incision should be wide and the knife should be broad.
And on the contrary for the debilitated person, in whose case you should venesect several times and the opening should be small.
The best method in venesecting is if the incision be at an angle, oblique, cutting, not piercing.
This manner of venesecting is safe from haemorrhage and from cutting the nerve; it is better and safer than cutting straight across or straight along.
To the patient who habitually faints during venesection you should give to eat beforehand a little bread macerated in the juice of unripe pomegranates or oxymel, if he be of a warm temperament; and draw off the blood in three or four instalments.
And if he be of a cold temperament let him take beforehand bread macerated in syrup of quinces or in aromatic syrup of honey or in fragrant syrup of basil.
If the patient faints during venesection and the cause is great loss of blood, then be should be given to drink meat-juice and thin syrup of basil; and he should perfume himself with galia moschata and anoint his chest with it.
And for the rest, use what we have spoken of in its place in the chapter dealing with fainting due to evacuation.
As for him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, when he is undergoing the venesection on account of great evacuation and the lowness of his strength, you should let the blood slowly, in proportion to his strength, on successive days.
For him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, being of robust body, it must be done seven or nine hours from the first venesection.
He who wishes to draw blood from his body to the side opposite to that toward which it tends, should be eased on the second or third day.
He who has abundant blood that has become hot and sharp and has produced fever should be bled at one time, and a large amount should be taken with a wide opening, until he faints (all the rules of venesection having been observed by you); but you should keep your finger on the pulse while the blood flows lest death take the place of fainting, for that often happens when the venesector is ignorant and there is carelessness.
If you wish to loosen the arm and let blood a second time and you find that the opening of the vein is now closed up and the outflow of blood is difficult, you should not press hard upon it nor twist the arm violently, for that is very harmful.
Either you must leave him a while and then bleed him again; or the clot of blood can be removed from the opening of the vein by using the blade of the scalpel, or by applying some salt dissolved in water; or apply some of the great theriac or shakhzanaya; and put light pressure upon it until the blood comes out.
But if the vein has begun to swell, leave it and do not touch it until the swelling has subsided.
And if you are unavoidably called to let blood again, venesect either above the place or in the other arm or another vessel.
Section of the cord of the arm: this is cut in place of the median and basilic veins when these are not to be found or are hidden; for this vein is composed of those two.
The way to venesect it is for the patient to dip his hand in hot water until the forearm is red from the warmth and the vessel stands out distinctly.
Then bandage a little above it with a moderate pressure, and then cut the vein a little obliquely, neither transversely nor longitudinally.
The incision should be broad, and you should make the cut a little above the wrist.
If the blood does not flow easily, have the hand again put into the vessel of hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have extracted what is needed.
If it be in the summer time you may be able to dispense with putting the hand back into the hot water; it is mainly in winter that you let the blood flow into hot water.
Venesection of this vessel is safer than all others for beneath it there is neither artery nor nerve.
Section of the salvatella of the right hand is efficacious in case of diseases of the liver.
The method of venesecting it is to tie a band round the wrist or grip it with your hand, after you have put it in hot water until the vein is swollen up and is plainly to be felt; then cut it somewhat obliquely; if you cut it right through that will not matter at all.
But be careful not to go too far with the knife, for underneath there are the tendons of the fingers and the place is bare of flesh.
Then put the hand again into hot water and let the blood flow; for if you do not put it into hot water again the blood will clot in the opening and will be prevented from flowing.
When you have extracted the required quantity of blood, put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not heal too quickly. You should act thus with every narrow branch.
Incision of the salvatella of the left hand is of value in diseases of the spleen.
Venesection of it should be carried out in the same manner as you did in the other.
Venesection of the saphena is beneficial in diseases of the lower part of the body, such as afflictions of the uterus and retention of the menses, and for diseases of the kidneys, and for chronic ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Now the manner of venesection is for the patient to put his foot in hot water, then friction should be applied to it until the veins fill up; then bind a thong over the joint of the foot; then the site of the vein at the ankle is shown up running toward the big toe and forming many branches on the surface of the foot.
Then make your incision either in the broadest branch or at the ankle before it ramifies, for that is better and safer.
If you venesect it on the surface of the foot, be careful of the tendons that are beneath on the surface of the foot. Make the incision obliquely as though you were cutting the vein through.
The knife should be a lancet.
If the flow of blood be impeded, put the foot back again into hot water and let the blood flow out into it until it is evacuated.
If the venesector makes a mistake the first time in the vein to be cut, let him repeat the section a little higher up, for the.place is safe; you need fear no mischief as long as you are careful of the tendons, as we said before.
In the same way you may deal with the saphena of the other foot.
Now the position of the sciatic vein is, as we said, on the outside near the heel.
Section of it is effective in pain in the hip when it arises from hot blood.
The way to venesect it is to make the patient get into the bath. Then hasten and bandage his leg from the hip to a distance of four fingers above the heel, with a long narrow bandage; for only this will cause it to appear.
When it has appeared then open it in whatever way you can; at an angle, which is best, or right through, or only cut it open, for it is a safe place.
But in many people it is very hard to find; and if you do not find it or it is in no way palpable, then venesect one of its branches, which will be seen on the surface of the foot towards the fourth toe and the little toe.
Be careful of the tendons, and let the amount of blood you require.
Then loosen the bandage and apply cotton wool to the site of the section and bandage the place; it will heal quickly.
On cupping and the manner of employing it.
Cupping-vessels are made of horn, wood, bronze, or glass.
Cupping is carried out in two ways: one with scarification and drawing blood, and the other without scarification.
The latter, cupping without scarification, may be carried out in two ways: with fire and without fire.
The points at which cupping with scarification and extraction of blood is performed are fourteen places in the body: the occiput, which is the back of the head; the interscapular region, which is the middle of the back of the neck; the two sides of the neck, equally on both sides; the chin, that is, beneath the lower jaw; the two shoulders; the coccyx, at the base of the tail; the antibrachium, the middle of the forearms; the two legs; and the two heel-veins.
What cupping does is to draw blood out of the fine vessels dispersed over the flesh; for this reason it does not cause the strength to decline as does venesection; nor may you use cupping, either with fire or without fire, in any disease due to plethora, until the whole body has been evacuated.
If disease or custom prescribe cupping we may apply it at any hour, at the beginning or end or middle of the month, at whatever time it may be.
So when we see anything of this kind, and especially if it be in the middle third of the month, we thereupon prescribe cupping after the second or third hour of the day has passed.
The effect of cupping the nape of the neck is to help in heaviness of the head and in a fluxion of humours into the eyes; but it should be done after a complete evacuation of the body.
This use of cupping may take the place of venesection of the cephalic vein.
But anyone suffering from coldness of the brain or catarrh should beware of using it, for this will cause serious harm.
So it should not be employed on old men or on anyone suffering from a cold disease of the head.
If anyone becomes addicted to it it brings about oblivion. You should therefore bid the cupper bring the cupping-vessel a little lower down lest oblivion supervene.
Now as to the application of cupping-vessels to the interscapular region: it is instead of venesection of the median and basilic veins; so it is effective for asthma and dyspnoea and for rupture of the organ of respiration, and for cough and plethora.
The cupping of the interscapular region should be made a little high, for if it is too low it will bring about weakness of the heart and stomach.
Cupping the sides of the neck helps in pains occurring in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, and in quinsy and in pain at the roots of the teeth; it replaces venesection of the basilic vein.
And you should bid the cupper not to scarify very deeply lest he cut an artery and cause haemorrhage.
The application of cupping under thé chin helps against ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases of the mouth ; and may replace venesection of the four labial vessels.
The application of cupping to the shoulders helps in palpitation of the heart arising from plethora and heat.
The application of cupping to the inside of the forearms helps in place of venesection of the three veins, namely the basilic, median, and cephalic; for it draws blood from all the capillaries of the flesh. These capillaries draw blood from other larger veins till the drawing reaches those three great veins.
You should bid the person who applies the vessels not to scarify deeply; for the place is bare of flesh and there are tendons and arteries beneath.
The application of a single cupping-vessel to the coccyx is effective for haemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers of the lower abdomen.
You must tell the cupper that the cupping-vessel should be large and of bronze, for the place requires strong suction, and a glass cupping-vessel may break; and he should scarify deeply.
Cupping applied to both legs reduces plethora manifestly, because it draws off blood from the whole body, and so is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys and uterus and bladder; and brings on the menses. It also serves for pustules and boils; and takes the place of venesection of the saphenous veins and the heel-veins.
But it greatly exhausts the body and causes fainting in most people.
The advantage of cupping of the heel-veins is much the same as that of the legs.
The way to apply the cupping-vessels: the vessel is first put in position empty; then you suck moderately; do not long hold the cupping-vessel in place, but apply it quickly and remove it quickly so that the humours gather evenly at the place; and go on doing it time after time until the place is seen to redden and to swell, and the redness of blood is manifested.
Then scarify, and repeat the suction very gently; then consider the bodily condition.
The person who is tender of flesh and porous of skin you should scarify once only, not more, lest the place ulcerate.
Tell him who applies the cupping-vessels to scarify rather widely and deeply, and to control the suction with gentleness and a delicate motion.
If there be a thickness of the blood he should scarify twice; the first time to make a way out for the thinner blood and serum; and the second time to complete the extraction of the thick blood.
If the blood be very turbid let him scarify a third time for completion.
In general, one scarification is enough when we wish to draw a little thick blood; but if we wish to draw much blood we make more scarifications.
If we judge that the blood is thick we should scarify deeply.
A fair depth for the scarification is the thickness of the skin, and no more.
He whose skin is thick, solid, desiccated, and narrow of pore: the operator should anoint the place with opening and emollient and resolving oils; if it be in the summer season, with, for example, oil of yellow gilliflower or of violets or of sweet almonds or of pumpkin-seeds. If it be in winter, with narcissus oil or oil of lilies or camomile oil, or of jasmine, or the like.
And if the superfluity be thick and cold, then with oil of marjoram or oil of wild thyme or oil of ben or oil of dill.
If he who is to be cupped has wide-open pores and tender flesh, he should be forbidden oil. After cupping, such people should wash the sites with rose-water or cold water or water of black nightshade or of gourds or of garden purslain, or the like.
But he whose blood is very humid should wash the sites of his cupping with vinegar or water of myrtle or sumac, and the like.
He that has thick superfluities should wash the sites of his cupping with old wine or water of purslain or decoction of dill or of camomile or the like.
One should beware of cupping in the bath or just after the bath, but should use the vessels one or two hours after leaving the bath. And no one should sleep after cupping.
The correct procedure to be observed before and after cupping by him who is to be cupped or venesected.
It is necessary for you first to consider, and if he that is to be cupped or venesected be bilious, and bitterness and inflammation prevail in his blood, he should take cooling things such as pomegranates and endive with vinegar and lettuce and oxymel and julep, and the like.
His diet should be chicken and mutton made into stews with vinegar, and soups with verjuice, and the like.
The man of frigid constitution should drink syrup of honey or syrup of quince or spiced oxymel; he should also take perfumed raisin wine, not too old and not too new; he should be bidden to be moderate in eating and should make his diet young pullets and larks and sparrows and young pigeons in white stews.
And on the day of cupping and venesection he should drink rather than eat.
It may sometimes be necessary to have some people drink the great theriac or musk-medicine or shllitha before cupping and before or after venesection, to strengthen the chief parts and to render the blood thin; but these draughts should not be given to the feverish.
Cupping without scarification is the cupping practised on the liver, the spleen, the breasts, the belly, the umbilicus, the region of the kidneys and the acetabulum of the femur; for these parts do not tolerate scarification.
Now the purpose of the vessels is either to draw blood from one part to another, as when we apply cups over the breasts in the case of nose-bleed; or to loosen from the part a frigid vapour that has become fixed in it, as when we place cupping-vessels on the abdomen and umbilicus; for they stimulate the part and warm it and remove the pain because they loosen the vapour.
Sometimes they are applied over the kidneys when there is an obstruction or stones in them; for often, by virtue of their drawing, the obstruction is opened up or the stones are dislodged from their site.
They act in the same way when they are applied over the liver and the spleen when flatus is permeating them.
These cupping-vessels may be used empty with suction only; or they may be used with fire.
Sometimes in pleuritic complaints they are applied filled with tepid water.
This is done by filling the vessel, which should be large, with plain hot water, or with hot water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
This is the figure of the cupping-vessel for use with fire. Its mouth should be the width of two opened fingers, as we have illustrated; the depth should be half a span; and in the side about halfway down there should be a small hole of a size to admit a needle.
It should be made of Chinese bronze or of brass. The edge should be thick, smooth, even, and polished, so as not to injure the part to which it is applied.
And in the middle there should be a transverse rod of bronze or iron to carry the lighted lamp.
You may make this kind of cupping-vessel in a large size, larger than we have described; and in a small size too, to suit various ailments and the age of the user.
For the cupping-vessels for boys and thin persons differ from those for men and stout persons.
Now this is the manner of applying this cupping-vessel with fire to a part of the body. You set light to a strongly twisted wick of linen or a small wax candle, and you set it on the middle of the cross-piece in the middle of the vessel so that the flame be directed toward the lower part of the cupping vessel and not burn the patient's body.
Then the vessel should be placed on the part with the finger kept over the above-mentioned hole; then when we have held the vessel sufficiently long there the finger is taken away, the vapour will come out through the hole, and the vessel will become loosened at once.
Then light the wick as prescribed and repeat if necessary.
But the cupping-vessel that is used in pleurisy, with water, has no cross-piece nor hole; it is used by simply filling with water and applying to the part.
This is the figure of it. Now the larger this cupping-vessel is, to hold much water, the better.
CHAPTER NINETY-SEVEN.
Leeches are mostly used on those parts of the body to which application of cupping-vessels is impossible, either because of their smallness, such as the lips, the gums, and so on; or because the part is bare of flesh, like the finger, the nose, and so on.
This is the way to use them: you seek some leeches that are in fresh water free of dirt.
Then you leave them in fresh water for a day and a night until they are hungry and nothing is left in their bellies; then you purge the patient's body, either by venesection or by the application of cupping vessels; then you scrub the afflicted part until it is flushed; and then place the leeches on it.
When they are full they will fall off.
If it is possible to make suction with a cupping vessel, the effect will be greater.
But if not, wash the part with vinegar followed by much water; then rub and put pressure on it.
If the blood continues to run after the leeches have fallen off, and becomes an ooze, let linen dressings be wetted with cold water and apply them over the place until the oozing stops.
But if the bleeding be serious then sprinkle upon the place powdered vitriol or gall or similar styptics, until the haemorrhage is stopped. Or let split shelled beans be applied to the place and left until they stick there, and then the bleeding will stop.
If it is necessary to repeat the application, the same leech should not be applied but another one if you possibly can.
If the leeches fail to stick on, the place should be wiped over with fresh blood or pricked with a needle to bring out a little blood; then apply them, for if they smell any blood they will immediately adhere.
When you wish to remove them, sprinkle over them a little powdered aloes or salt or ashes, then they will at once fall away.
This third part of the book, too, is an essential necessity in the practice of medicine; it concerns the setting of the fracture or dislocation occurring in bones.
You should know, my sons, that ignorant practitioners and laymen and those who have never turned the pages of a single book of the Ancients about it, nor studied a single letter of it, arrogate this part of the art to themselves.
For this reason this section of the science has died out in our parts; I have myself found no one competent in it; and whatever skill I have, I have derived for myself by my long reading of the books of the Ancients and my thirst to understand them until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.
Then through the whole of my life I have adhered to experience and practice.
So now I have described for you in this book all that my knowledge has encompassed on the subject and that my experience has encountered; I have made it accessible for you and rescued it from the abyss of prolixity; I have reduced it to a brief outline; and have explained it most clearly. I have made for you many drawings of the instruments that are used in it, which is an adjunct to explanation, as I did in the two previous books.
CHAPTER ONE.
In which is given the necessary compendious preliminary information on fractures. Before we begin to speak of the fractures and dislocations of individual members we must, as an introduction to this book, give the general and particular information which compels your understanding and your being versed in it; both you and anyone else beside who is eager to learn this noble art.
So I say that when anyone has sustained a fracture or dislocation or luxation or fall, you should first hasten to venesect him, or get his bowel open, or both, if there be nothing to hinder such as physical weakness, or unless it be a small boy or a very old man to whom an accident of this kind has happened; or unless the weather be excessively hot or cold.
Next, let his diet be restricted to cold vegetables and the flesh of fowl and kids; he is to be forbidden wine and rich meat and gluttony and all foods that fill out the blood-vessels, until you are sure that there is no abscess and see no reason to suspect a flux of matter to the place.
Then let the patient return to his former diet according to his custom.
When the broken bone has begun to mend, the patient should be nourished with very nourishing food, fat, strong, having some glutinous property, such as porridge, rice, heads, trotters, the tripe of cows, eggs, fresh fish, heavy wine, and the like; for on this diet the mending of the fracture will be quicker and better.
You should know that fractures occurring in mature and old people cannot join and mend into the original condition, on account of the dryness and hardness of their bones; though any bones that are extremely soft, like those of infants, may make a union and heal.
Yet nature produces around the bone on all sides something like glue, with a certain viscosity, with whose help it joins, and it binds so that one part adheres to the other and they are linked to one another until it be good and firm as it had been before; so that there is no impediment to any of its functions.
It is on this account that the patient's food should be the sort that has solidity and glueyness and thickness, as we have said.
You should know that there are as many different types of fracture as there are members. Thus a fracture of the leg bone differs from a fracture of the cranium; and a fracture of the breast bone differs from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly there are differences among the other parts.
We shall give an exposition of each kind of fracture, each in its own chapter and distinguished from the others.
The fracture of each bone also has its own variations; for the fracture may be a clean break without splintering; or the fracture may be along the bone, with splinters and projections which may be sharp or may not; and the fracture may involve a wound and a laceration of the skin; and the fracture may be a crack.
Each kind has its own special technique of setting which will be mentioned in detail, each in its place.
Among the diagnostic signs of a broken bone are: distortion, protrusion, the aspect of it, and the crepitus when you press on it with the hand.
When there is no obvious distortion or crepitus at the site, nor do you feel movement when you manipulate the bone, and the patient does not experience severe pain, there is no fracture there.
But it is possible that there is a luxation or a slight fracture or a little crack; so you must not disturb it with any extension or pressure, but apply one of the remedies suitable to the site, such as will be described later; then bind up gently.
If the bone is parted and broken in two and there is no fragmentation but a simple separation of one part from its fellow, then you should lose no time in straightening and aligning it before an abscess sets in.
If an abscess does set in, then let a few days pass until it has subsided; then gently and skilfully straighten it in whatever way you can.
You should know that the setting or alignment of this is easier than that of a splintered bone.
Then bandage as will be prescribed.
But if the bone is splintered, extension from either side is necessary, whether it be hand or foot; with your own hands if it be a small member, or with two ropes or with one hand and a rope.
You should place the part on a flat surface in its natural attitude so that when both parts of the broken bone have been extended you can try to restore the fragments to their proper place with all the skill and gentleness possible; and do your utmost to ensure that the patient experience no pain or distress as you operate.
Try diligently to get one part of the bone fitted in the best form to the other.
At the same time you should palpate and investigate both of them with your hand, and if you find anything wrong then mend it and straighten it to the best of your ability.
But avoid violent extension or compression which many ignorant people apply; for by doing so they often cause abscess or crippling in the limb, as I myself have many times seen.
As to the way to bandage a broken limb, it is as I shall now describe to you. You should know that limbs which may be fractured vary in their size and shape.
The strips of bandage for those that are small, such as an arm or finger or forearm or the like, should be soft and fine, while those that are thick, such as the hip, back, or breast, should have broad and strong bandages.
For a broad bandage holds fast to a big limb, binding it all round with an even pressure so that no defect may occur.
Then, after you have finished the setting, begin by applying a suitable liniment on soft tow over the site of the fracture, then start to wrap the bandage over the actual site, three or four turns of bandage as the part may require, winding it fairly tight.
Then carry on the bandage above the site of the fracture, winding it more loosely than on the fractured place, and continue a little with the bandaging beyond the place of fracture, loosening the tension gradually, until you have taken up a good amount of the sound part.
Then take another bandage and wind it several turns over the fracture and then carry it over the part below the fracture, the tightness and looseness being arranged in the same way that we prescribed for the first covering, of the upper part.
Then put between the bandages enough soft tow or soft rags to correct the curves of the fracture, if any; otherwise put nothing in.
Then wind over it another bandage and at once lay over it strong splints, if the part be not swollen and effused. But if there be swelling or effusion in the part, apply something to allay the swelling and disperse the effusion; leave it on for several days and then bind on the splints.
The splints should be made of broad halves of cane, cut and shaped with skill; or the splints may be made of the wood used for sieves, which are made of pine; or of palm branches; or of brier or giant fennel or the like, whatever wood be at hand.
Then bind over the splints another bandage just as tightly as you did your first; then over that tie it up with cords arranged in the way we have said, that is, with the pressure greatest over the site of the fracture and lessened as you move away from it.
The cords should be of medium thickness, of linen supple of quality. For if the cords are too thick, such as I have seen ignorant people use who made their cords of twisted bands of linen, that will be a grave error, for moderate tension with these is impossible.
Nor are fine threads suitable either, for with these you cannot achieve sufficient tension. Between splints there should be a space of not less than a finger's breadth.
If, after bandaging, the patient is hurt in the sound parts by the ends of the splints, then put a little soft tow or carded wool under them until they no longer hurt him thus.
As for the case of a fracture accompanied by an open wound, it will be mentioned in a special section on its own.
You should know that not every fracture should be bound up with splints on the first day; that is, when the part is big you should not apply splints until five or seven days after, or more, depending on when you are satisfied that there is no effusion.
This is a description of the plasters that the Ancients used for repair, applied to a fracture, dislocation, or sprain.
Description of a common simple plaster for the repair of fractures, suited to most constitutions, particularly for women and children, because in it there predominates neither hot nor cold. Take mill-dust, that is, the fine flour that sticks to the walls of a mill as the grindstone moves.
Pound it as it is without sieving, with egg-white, to a medium consistency; then use.
Description of another plaster for the repair of a fracture, luxation, or dislocation: take ten drachms each of pulse, gum-mastic, acacia, elecampane, mughath, and sukk; five drachms each of myrrh and aloes; twenty drachms of tamarisk and twenty drachms of clay of Armenia or Asia Minor; all should be pounded fine and mixed with water of tamarisk, or with eggwhite if the patient be of a warm constitution; then use this plaster, which is excellent for uniting, quickly repairing broken bones, and suits most people because of its mildness.
Description of another plaster valuable for a fracture or sprain: let there be taken ten drachms each of mughath, pulse, and white marsh mallows, five drachms each of myrrh and aloes, six drachms of acacia, and twenty drachms of Armenian clay.
Let them all be well beaten up and passed through a sieve and made into a paste with water or egg-white and used.
Description of a plaster for dislocated joints or bones, soothing the accompanying pain, and for a crack or fissure of bone: let unwashed wool be taken and soaked in a decoction of oil and vinegar and applied to the place.
Now this plaster has no power of repair but it is outstanding for reducing effusion and dispersing pain.
Description of another plaster for the repair of a broken bone: let there be taken the leaves of the hard fig and of the wild poppy and both be beaten up together and a plaster made of them while still fresh and damp.
Description of another simple plaster used when a fracture is mending and you wish to disperse residual swellings: take one part each of marsh mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and flour of vetch; pound it all and make a paste with decoction of wine, if the part be not inflamed.
But if it be inflamed make it up with water of fresh coriander or plain water, and use.
Description of another plaster stronger than the former for resolving, used if a hard swelling arises as the bone sets: let there be taken equal parts of each of marsh mallow roots, linseed, fenugreek, melilot, sweet marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; they should all be beaten up together and made into a paste with willow infusion or sweet water or wine, according to whether the part is inflamed or its heat has subsided.
Now Hippocrates in his book did not mention any application for the repair of a fractured part except a wax plaster made of wax and oil, nothing else. He prescribed that it be of a consistency midway between thick and thin.
Galen, on the other hand, thought it good to apply to the broken limb, when it is mending, things which have a certain power of drying, with some heat, such as myrrh, aloes, olibanum, and the sort of thing we have mentioned.
Description of a plaster valuable for debility and pain: let equal parts of each be taken of mughath, chickpease, minced human hair or birds' feathers, marsh mallows and salt; grind it up and pass through a sieve and make into a paste and use as a plaster.
As to the length of time the bandages should remain on before being loosened: you should keep an eye on the patient and if he suffers no pain or itching or any shifting of the broken bone, then they should not be loosened for a number of days; but if he experiences at the place a violent itching or a disturbing pain or swelling, then hasten to loosen them and make no delay; and remove the plaster.
Then you must take a soft cloth or a soft marine sponge and dip it in tepid water and bathe the place until the itching subsides and the pain settles; then let the limb rest for an hour; then apply to it raw wool soaked in oil and vinegar or oil of roses, and bandage it on for one night until you are sure there is no effusion and the swelling of the limb has subsided and the pain has gone.
Then put the bandage on again gently, and a light plaster; do not bind it up as you did at the first but go gently with it until it heal.
If you see that the effusion, inflammation, pain, swelling, and other symptoms are totally gone, and you need to plaster and bandage it, then repeat just as you did at first.
But if none of these things that we have mentioned occur, then do not loosen it until after three, four, or five days or a week; sometimes it may be left up to twenty days, depending on how the limb appears to you, as we said, until the fracture be united and the flesh over it be near to joining.
Then bandage more tightly than before, and increase the heaviness of the patient's food as has been mentioned.
If you see the place of the fracture getting more dry and thin than it should, you may know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching it; so foment it with tepid water each time you loosen it; do this every three days, and ease the bandaging somewhat. This action makes nourishment flow to the limb and it will quickly heal.
What some ignorant bone-setters do is to break the bone again if at first the repair is not as it should be and has mended crookedly. This operation of theirs is mistaken and dangerous; if it were right the Ancients would undoubtedly have spoken of it in their books and would have used it.
But I have not found a trace of it in a single one of them; and the right course is not to use it.
CHAPTER TWO. On a fracture occurring in the head.
The kinds of fracture occurring in the head are many, of various forms and differing causes. Some fractures are due to a sword-stroke which may cut right through the bone and reach the membrane beneath the bone, like an adze-cut in wood, for which reason this kind of cut is called 'ascial'. Or the sword may cut through part of the bone, only slicing through the surface and not reaching the depth; this kind is called an absolute avulsion.
The wounds in these two fractures can be either big or small. There are also some fractures accompanied by smashing or crushing; such as by a blow from a stone or by falling on a stone, and the like.
A fracture of this kind will be either penetrating, reaching the membrane beneath the bone; or superficial; the wound in these two fractures may be either big or small.
Then there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone, as fine as a hair, a thin crack; therefore this kind of fracture is called 'capillary'.
There is a fracture due to a fall or a blow from a stone and the like, making a dent in the surface of the bone and a hollow at the site as occurs in a bronze bowl when a blow falls on it and a portion of it is pushed in.
This mostly occurs in heads whose bones are soft, as those of children.
Any of these kinds of fracture may also have splinters, jagged or otherwise; we shall deal with the treatment of all these in their place.
All these kinds of fracture are diagnosed by laying them bare and investigating them with probes and removing all the lacerated tissues over them.
The 'capillary' kind is diagnosed by laying bare the bone, wiping it clean, and rubbing ink on it, when the fracture will appear black.
As to the treatment of the fracture: begin by paying attention to the patient's symptoms. If you observe any symptom clearly indicating something dangerous, such as bilious vomit, convulsion, mental derangement, loss of voice, fainting, high fever, protrusion and inflammation of the eyes, and similar symptoms, then leave the patient alone and do not treat him; for in the majority of cases these symptoms undoubtedly indicate the approach of death.
But if you find symptoms that do not alarm you and you see hope of recovery for him, then begin treatment as follows.
If he be brought to you immediately after his injury and it be the season of winter, you should try to remove the bone, at all events before the fourteenth day.
If it be summer you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the covering membrane beneath the bone and over the brain be infected, and before the above-mentioned symptoms occur.
If the fracture has already reached the cerebral membrane with fragmentation of the bone and depression, then you must cut out the splintered and broken part as I shall now describe to you.
Shave the head of the injured patient and lay the bone bare in any way you can, following the course of the injury and in the manner least grievous to the injured man.
If, when you lay the bone bare, you encounter a haemorrhage or abscess, meet the case with suitable remedies; that is, pack the place with dressings soaked in wine and oil of roses, and cleanse the wound until the swelling subsides and you are safe from haemorrhage; then begin the trepanning and removal of the bone.
This may be done in one of two ways.
One way is to cut the bone with a fine-bladed chisel, this being the figure of it. Then after this one employ another chisel, a little broader. It is figured here.
Then use yet another chisel still broader than the second.
You should have by you a number of different chisels, some broader than others and some shorter than others; their tips should be exquisitely sharp; and they should be made of Indian iron or best steel.
Let the strokes upon the chisel be gentle lest the head be shocked or injured.
If the bone be strong and hard you should, before you use the chisel, make perforations round about it with drills called 'non-sinking' drills.
Their name of non-sinking drills is due to their not piercing the cranial bone through to what is beneath, because the drill has a circular margin beneath its sharp head like a small collar or wheel, that prevents it from sinking in and going beyond the thickness of the bone.
You must obtain a large number of these drills each of which will suit a certain thickness of bone; so that for each skull you have a drill whose pointed extremity is of a length to suit the thickness of that skull.
Here are figured three kinds of drill, large, medium, and small. As to the manner of perforation round the fractured bone, you apply the drill to the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced, then you transfer the drill to another place, making the distance between the perforations about the thickness of a probe.
Then with the chisels cut out the bone between the perforations, using the utmost delicacy, as we have said. Then take out the bone, either with your hand or with some other instrument you have ready for the purpose, such as forceps or fine tongs.
You will have to observe the utmost caution that neither drill nor chisel touch any part of the membrane.
When you have cut the bone circularly, free from the membrane if adherent to it, and have removed it, then you will have to scrape away and smooth out all the roughness in the remaining bone with another instrument, resembling a chisel, except that it must be finer and slenderer than any of them.
If there are any little bits or spicules of bone left, pick them out with whatever instrument you can, gently; and then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we shall describe.
The other way of operating is altogether easy and free from danger; Galen mentioned it and greatly praised it; these are his words: You should begin by laying bare that part of the bone where the fracture is severest and most obvious; when you have done so, place under it the tip of this lenticular chisel figured here.
The lenticular part of it should be smooth and not for cutting, the sharp part of it being on both sides longitudinally, as you see; so that the lenticular part is resting upon the meninges while the cutting surface is on the bone.
Then with a small hammer strike the tool on one side until you gently cut through the bone in a circle, in the confident knowledge that nothing untoward can happen to the membrane even though the operator be the most ignorant and cowardly of men; yes, even if he be sleepy.
If any membrane stick to any part of the bone, strip it off with the lenticular tip of the chisel and free it gently from it, for it will come away without harm or danger.
If it be a fracture of the bone not reaching to the meninges, only the surface of the bone being separated, and there remain some roughness and fine splinters, you should smooth down the roughness and remove the splinters with fine scrapers, of which you should have a number, of varying sizes so that you can use the one best fitted and most suitable, in the light of what is suggested by your operative method and the broken bone itself and its shape.
When you smooth the bone you must first use the broadest of the scrapers and then a finer one, and so on until you come to use the finest and slenderest of all.
As to the rest, the little capillary fractures and fine fissures, you will have to apply to each of them that treatment that will bring about a perfect repair.
This is obvious to anyone who has the least practice in this art and is acquainted with what we have written in explanation of the big fractures.
If the meninges are left bare when you remove the bone, you should take a linen dressing measured to the wound, soak it in oil of roses, and apply it to the opening of the wound; then take another dressing, folded in two or three, soak it in wine and oil of roses and apply it over the first with the utmost gentleness so as not to press upon the meninges; then employ a broad bandage on top, but tighten it only enough to keep the wound covered.
Leave it with this dressing on for a day or two until you are sure there is no abscess; then loosen it and apply desiccant remedies such as lily roots, vetch-flour, powdered frankincense, birthwort, and the like.
The method is that you make a powder of these drugs and sprinkle it, dry as it is, upon the wound; in short, in these cases use drugs whose nature is cleansing and not irritating.
In this be most diligent, that the wound, while you are treating it, be clean; nor let there be any dirty vestiges of ointment in it or any filth; and let no pus collect in it; for when pus collects on the meninges it corrupts them and renders them necrotic, which causes great harm to the patient.
Sometimes the surface meninges go black when the bone is removed, especially when the treatment of them is neglected; so observe, and if the patient exhibit any of the symptoms that we have mentioned you may know that he is undoubtedly doomed.
But if the blackness be due to some medicament applied to it, which has the power to produce blackness of that kind, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of oil of roses, beat them well up together, spread on a cloth and apply it to the membrane; then treat as necessary until cured.
CHAPTER THREE.
On the repair of a broken nose.
You should know that the only portion of the nose that can break is the upper portion in its entirety or in one of its two parts; for it consists of two bones. The lower portion is cartilaginous and unbreakable; what can happen to it is contusion, twisting, or flattening.
If one of the two (upper) parts be broken you should pass your little finger into the nostril and straighten out the fracture from inside, with your index and thumb outside, until you reduce the nose to its natural shape; do it gently, and take care that you do not cause the patient pain in doing it.
If the fracture be in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it, it should be evened by means of a probe with some thickness to it.
If the break be on both sides, follow the same course.
Haste must be made to set it on the first day if possible; but if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the effusion has subsided.
Then introduce into the nasal foramen a linen pad, if it be a unilateral fracture, or two pads if it be bilateral; the pads should be thick enough to fill the nasal foramen.
Certain of the ancient bone-setters suggest that you should soak the pads in butter and change them daily, but I do not think so; you should rather soak them in egg-white made up into a paste with mill-dust; then leave the pads in until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardens.
Sometimes, instead of pads, the stems of goose-quills are introduced into the nose after being wound round with a piece of soft cloth, so as to make a stronger support for the fracture of the nose and not to hinder the patient's breathing.
This is not absolutely necessary; do it if you prefer; or, if you prefer, put in pads.
If during your operation an abscess occurs, apply to the nose a wax plaster or cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses or a little diachylon ointment.
If no abscess occurs you should apply externally a plaster of white flour and frankincense made into a paste with egg-white; then put on top some soft tow, but do not bind up the nose at all.
If the nasal bones are broken into small pieces or crushed, you should cut down upon them, remove them with a suitable instrument, and then suture the incision and dress with suitable ointments which encourage granulation and scarring.
If there occur an internal wound of the nose, you should dress it with pads and employ leaden tubes until it heals.
CHAPTER FOUR.
On the repair of a broken lower jaw.
When the lower jaw is broken and it is a fracture without an open wound, examine it.
If it is merely an external fracture, not broken in two but sunken inwards, which is easily recognized, you should introduce the index of your left hand into the patient's mouth if it be a right-hand fracture; but your right index if it be a left-sided fracture; and with this, from within, push the concavity of the fracture gently outwards, with the other hand outside, regulating the correction.
If the break in the jaw be total, into two, traction must be employed, in a straight line on both sides, until it can be set.
If any of the teeth be loosened or broken away, bind those that you hope may be preserved with a gold or silver or silken ligature; then put wax upon the fractured mandible, and upon that a doubled dressing, and upon the dressing a large and strong splint or a piece of shoe-sole leather, the length of the jaw; then over that bandage in such wise as you conveniently can and as will conduce to drawing it together so as not to loosen.
Bid the patient hold himself quiet and still, and let his food be soft broths.
If you think there is any change of form at all, hasten to loosen it on the third day; then correct the change and apply a plaster of mill-dust and egg-white, or of white flour, after you have removed the wax from it, applying soft tow over the plaster.
So long as the plaster sticks on it and the bone undergoes no change of state, let it be and do not loosen until it heals and the fracture mends, for often a fracture of this kind mends in three weeks.
If during that time an effusion occurs, employ those means of allaying this that we have often mentioned, until the swelling subsides.
If the fracture be with an open wound, examine it, and if one or more splinters have been detached from the bone, gently remove the pieces of splinter with any suitable instrument.
If the opening of the wound be narrow, open it up with a scalpel as much as you need.
When you have removed these pieces, letting no trace of them remain, suture the opening of the wound if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the ointments that are suitable for that purpose and will encourage the growth of flesh over the wound, until it heals.
CHAPTER FIVE.
On the repair of a broken collar-bone.
The collar-bone is very often broken from the end of the humerus anteriorly, and the fracture of it may be in one of three ways.
It may be broken and separated into two without splintering; this is the easiest to repair. Or else splintering occurs, which is most difficult to repair. Or it is a compound fracture.
When it is a simple fracture the operation involves having two assistants present; one of them to hold steady the arm adjacent to the fractured clavicle, and the other to stretch the neck in the opposite direction.
Then level the fracture with your fingers until it is reduced to its proper form and there is neither prominence nor concavity.
If there is need of still greater extension, place in the armpit of the patient a ball of cloth or wool made to a suitable size; and stretch and lift up the clavicle and squeeze the roll with your hand until the fracture is set in the proper way.
If you are unable to draw the extremity of the clavicle outwards on account of its being depressed, the patient will have to lie on his back and there must be put under his shoulder a medium-sized bolster.
The assistant is to press the shoulder down until the depressed collar bone is elevated, and then you can set the fracture and even it out with your fingers.
If you feel a splinter separated from the clavicle and movable, you must cut down upon the splinter and gently remove it.
If the splinter sticks to the bone, you must contrive to cut it with one of the chisels you have prepared for that, having first put beneath the clavicle the instrument to protect the membrane; an instrument made of wood or iron, of which this is the figure.
It resembles a spoon but without a hollow. It should be as broad as you need, having regard to the size of the bone, and as long as you can use at operation.
As you see, it should be provided with one wide and one narrow extremity.
If the opening you made when you extracted the splinter of bone be wide and you feel safe against an abscess, suture the edges together.
But if the opening be small or you fear an abscess, pack the wound with material and pads proportional to the opening.
If an abscess occur, soak the dressing with oil of roses and vinegar or wine and apply.
The whole point is that the splint should not slip from over the fracture; so you should examine the patient every day, and whenever the bandage has loosened and you see the splint has shifted, then put it right and tighten the bandage.
Make the patient sleep lying on his back, and at night when he is asleep place a small bolster under the axilla so as to raise his arm from his side, for with the raising of the humerus the fracture of the clavicle will be elevated. Or bind his arm to his neck.
Do not loosen the bandage for twelve days unless there arise at the place any pruritus or swelling.
Then renew the plaster if you think it necessary, and bandage again and leave until the fracture of the collar-bone is set and knits.
The majority of these cases are firm and strong in twenty-eight days, though in some people it takes less.
CHAPTER six.
On the repair of a fracture of the scapula.
The scapula is rarely fractured in the broad part but it does break at its margins.
When any part of it is broken or it breaks in the middle (which is recognized by palpation) you should attempt the correction of the fracture according to the shape it takes, and its restoration to its natural form, by whatever means you can.
Then apply over the place mill-dust with eggwhite, and soft tow; and over that a dressing made of a folded cloth; and over that a broad splint made of thin board to the size of the whole scapula or a little wider.
If there be beneath the splint a hollow in any part of the scapula, level it with soft tow so that the splint rests evenly.
Then bind tightly over it a long sling and make sure that the splint does not slip out of place.
Examine the bandage daily; and whenever it gets loose tighten it and adjust the splint if it has shifted.
The patient should lie on his sound side.
The scapula mends in twenty or twenty-five days.
When this time has elapsed you may safely loosen the bandaging, for this is one of the bones in which there is no danger of fragmentation or cracking.
If a splinter of bone protrudes and starts to prick under the skin, cut down upon it and remove it, and do as I said under fracture of the collar-bone, to allay the effusion, if anything of that kind happen.
CHAPTER SEVEN.
On the repair of a fracture of the breast.
The breast is sometimes fractured in the middle but this happens rarely; more often it is the extremities of it that are broken and comminuted.
The symptoms that occur when it is broken in the middle are that he bows downwards and suffers violent pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and sometimes he vomits blood; and there is an obvious and palpable concavity in the bone.
Now the way to mend it is for the patient to lie on his back, and you place a pillow between his shoulders; then his shoulders are squeezed, and with your hands you press together his ribs from both sides and skilfully try to equalize them in any way you conveniently can, until the bone is reduced to its proper form.
Then apply over it a plaster and a pad and place over that a splint of thin willow board or brier or similar light wood, first wrapping it in cloth; then gently bind this upon the fractured bone so that it does not slip; and carry your bandage round about the back several times, tying it firmly; then inspect it constantly, and whenever it loosens tighten it.
If you are compelled to loosen it on account of itching at the place, or pain or swelling, loosen it quickly and remove the plaster and correct whatever has occurred with the appropriate treatment. Then renew the plaster if you think fit, and keep it bandaged until it heals.
CHAPTER EIGHT.
On the repair of ribs when they are fractured.
You should know that fracture of the ribs occurs only at the thick parts bordering on the vertebrae, whereas the anterior extremities are only contused, because they are cartilaginous; this is easily diagnosed on examination with the fingers.
They should be set by levelling out the fracture with the fingers in any manner you can so that the form is as it should be; then apply the plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
If it be a depressed fracture of the ribs, then the patient will have a vehement pain and a piercing sensation like that of pleurisy, since the bone is piercing the pleura; in addition he will have difficulty in breathing and will cough, and vomit much blood; the treatment of this is difficult.
In this the Ancients practised many devices.
Some said that the patient should have food of such a kind as to generate wind and inflation to blow out and stretch the belly and so push out the fracture.
We, however, reject this, since it will excite an effusion if one has not already arisen; and if one has arisen it will increase and confirm it.
Some of them said a cupping-vessel should be applied to the place and strong suction be made; this seems more reasonable except that there is a risk of the vessel's drawing superfluities to the place on account of his weak state.
Some of them said that the place should be covered with wool soaked in warm oil and that a pad should be placed in the intercostal space to fill it up so as to make the bandaging level when you wind it round. Then treat the patient with diet and medicines as for pleurisy.
If the patient is in such a bad way that he cannot bear it, the bone painfully piercing the pleura, and we are afraid for him, then we shall have to cut down upon the place and lay bare the broken rib; then we place under it the instrument to protect the membrane, which has been described, and gently cut out the bone and remove it.
Then the edges of the wound should be joined, with a suture if large, and dressed with ointments until healed.
If meanwhile there arise an abscess, quickly soak pads in oil of roses and apply them to the place and treat the patient with internal remedies against abscess too.
Let him lie upon the side which is easier for him to sleep on, until it heals.
CHAPTER NINE.
On setting the vertebrae of the back and neck.
When a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, which is rare, as mostly they suffer contusion, as do the spinal vertebrae—when it happens to anyone and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then look and if you see both his hands relaxed and numb and dead and he has no power to move or stretch or close them, and when you pinch them or prick them with a needle he does not notice it or feel any pain in them, you may know, as a general rule, that it will not mend, for he is doomed.
But if he moves them both and feels in them the pinching and pricking, you may know that the spinal medulla is still intact and that under treatment the patient will recover.
If anything of this nature happens to the vertebrae of the back and you wish to know if he will recover or not, then pay attention to his feet.
If you see them relaxed and in the situation we described in the case of the hands, and when he lies on his back he passes flatus and faeces involuntarily, and lying prone he passes water involuntarily and lying on his back he cannot pass water if he wishes, then you may know his case is hopeless, so do not concern yourself with his treatment.
But if nothing of this kind occur then the case is easier.
The way to treat this latter kind of case is to try to reduce the swelling by applying over the injured vertebra oil of roses, alone, or with roasted yolks of egg; apply three times a day until the swelling has gone down.
Then apply to the place one of the strengthening and absorbent plasters and bind it on; bid him keep quiet and still and sleep only in the attitude in which he has no pain, until he is well.
If the injury is accompanied by fragmentation or a separation of part of the bone, you must cut down on it and remove the bone; then bring together the edges of the opening, by suture if it be wide; then treat with granulating ointments until it heals.
If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the sacrum of the tail, breaks, introduce the thumb of your left hand into his anus and reset the bone with the other hand in whatever way is possible and affords the best setting; then apply over it a plaster, and a splint if necessary, and bind it up.
And if you perceive a fragment in the fracture, cut down upon it, remove it, and dress the wound as before said, until it heals.
CHAPTER TEN.
On setting a fractured hip.
It is rare indeed that hip-bones are fractured, and if they are fractured the fracture consists of a comminution of the extremities of them and a longitudinal splitting and a bending inward; and the patient feels a pain and a piercing at the site, and the leg on the fractured side is benumbed.
To set it, you pass your hand over it and ascertain what the shape of the fracture is.
If it is a fracture of the extremity only, set that fracture in whatever manner is convenient for you until it answers to its proper shape.
But if it be a longitudinal fracture or it has bent inwards, have the patient lie on his stomach so as to make it convenient for setting the fracture; and when you have set it apply over it a plaster and over that a splint of wood or leather, and bandage it in such wise that you have no fear that the fracture may extend or the splint slip.
Level out the cavity of the lumbar region with some filling so that it may take the bandage evenly, and bid the patient sleep on his back or on his sound side.
If there occur an effusion, then refrain from bandaging or setting it until the effusion subsides; and apply to it something to allay it as before said; then return to setting it and bandaging it as it should be.
If there be any splinters in the bone or anything crumbles away from the extremities, it must not be pulled out or touched, but set externally as we have said, and the bandaging should be left until it heals.
CHAPTER ELEVEN.
On setting a fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is what lies between the elbow and the head of the scapula.
If it is fractured it may be set in one of two ways. One is to take a smooth bow-shaped piece of wood of medium thickness, like this.
You tie two bands at the two ends and then it is hung from above.
The patient is to sit on a seat; then his broken arm is folded upon the piece of wood in such a way that his axilla fits into the middle of the curve of the piece of wood.
Then hang a heavy weight from the arm, or have an assistant pull it downwards; then the doctor should straighten out the fracture with both hands together until it is properly reduced.
The other way is to make the patient lie back and to suspend his hand from his neck by a band, then you instruct two assistants. One is to grasp with both hands the arm above the fracture, and the other the arm below the fracture; and each should make extension toward himself.
And if you wish to extend more strongly, tie a band below the fracture and another above, and let each assistant pull toward himself.
If the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder you will have to put one band beneath the axilla and the other below the fracture near the elbow.
Similarly, if the fracture be near the elbow you will have to put a band over the place and over the elbow itself.
Then gently and without violence straighten out the fracture until it is restored to its proper shape and fits together well, and then tighten it if no abscess occur.
But if an abscess occur, leave the bandaging until the seventh day and apply raw wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses until the abscess subsides; then bind it up.
The method of binding it is to apply a plaster to the fracture; then wind round the plaster a bandage of new material; then bind the forearm to the humerus, placing his hand open on his shoulder.
Then apply pads and bandages to the arm and forearm so that the forearm serves instead of splints, if there is no contra-indication and you see no pathological change in the broken bone.
But should you fear any such change then use splints.
The way to use these is to place over the fracture itself a splint that is broader and stronger than the rest; and leave a space of a finger's breadth between splints; the splint should be of a length to suit the fracture with the addition of three fingers' breadth all round.
Then bandage over the splints in the manner mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
That is, you should bandage more tightly over the fracture itself and more lightly as you get away from the fracture.
If you decide to put on splints and bandage, as we have said, at the time you set the limb, do so.
But if you fear an abscess, leave the splinting and bandaging until the seventh day as we have said.
Then examine the bandaging every third day lest there be itching or swelling at the place; or nourishment be prevented from reaching the limb on account of excessively tight bandaging; treat all these in the proper manner according to our prescriptions.
But if you are confident that nothing of this sort is happening then do not loosen the bandaging until after many days.
The patient should be made to sleep on his back with his hand on his stomach, and under the humerus there should be placed a cushion evenly filled with wool.
And examine it at all times of the day and night lest the shape of the broken limb suffer any deformity or the binding loosen; do your utmost to put any such thing right.
You should also direct the patient's diet along the line that we have given earlier; namely, at first the food should be light until the bone has begun to knit; then you should order heavier food.
Now it is the nature of the humerus and of the leg to knit in forty days; then they should be loosened and the patient should go to the bath and be treated with suitable ointments.
If the fracture be ugly and contused, do not unfasten it for fifty days or even two months.
CHAPTER TWELVE.
On setting a fracture of the forearm.
The forearm consists of two bones and is sometimes called 'the two firesticks'. One of these bones is small and is in line with the thumb, the other is large; this is the one placed lower, under the smaller one.
The larger alone may be broken, or the smaller alone, or both broken together.
When the small upper bone (radius) is broken it is easy to set and its mending is rapid.
When the lower bone (ulna) breaks it is bad and its mending is difficult.
Worst of all is when both bones break together.
If the broken bone is the radius, the doctor when setting it must use light traction, gently, until he has it straight.
If it is the ulna that breaks, he must employ stronger traction on it.
If both bones break he must employ very strong traction.
During setting and extension the hand must be disposed on a cushion, spread out with the thumb uppermost, higher than all the fingers, and the little finger downmost, while the patient sits cross-legged upon the floor.
The cushion should be on a level with him so that he does not suffer discomfort.
Then let an attendant extend the arm from below, either by hand or by means of a band, while another attendant extends it from above similarly.
Then the doctor may straighten the bone so as to restore it to the best possible shape.
If there be any splinters in the fracture he must do his utmost to restore each splinter to its place.
If a detached splinter appears there and is piercing the skin and you have no hope of restoring it, cut down upon it and remove it in the manner we have mentioned earlier.
If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, we have devoted a separate section to this, so take the treatment of it from there.
If, when you begin to set the bone, an effusion occurs, smear a cloth with the wax made from oil of roses and white wax, of medium thickness, and bind the dressing on gently. When the effusion subsides, remove the wax and apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust and egg-white, then apply splints; the splint that goes on the actual fracture should be a little wider and stronger than the rest.
You should know that the number of splints for an arm is, as a rule, six, whether the fracture be of one bone or of both together.
Then bandage more tightly and strongly over the site of the fracture, and, as you wrap the bandage above and below the fracture, bind little by little more loosely according to the instruction given at the beginning of the book.
The dressings wound round the fracture should be gentle and soft, not very hard, while the cord for binding is best made of linen of medium thickness as we have prescribed.
Some days later, examine the limb and the bandaging and if anything has happened that should be put right, such as pruritus in the limb, the limb should be bathed in warm water until the pruritus has subsided.
Let the limb be unbandaged for one night so that he may rest, then put the bandage on again.
If the bandaging has become loose and the bone has shifted or anything of that sort, correct it all diligently.
Look also to see if nourishment is being prevented from reaching the part on account of over-bandaging, in which case you will have to loosen it a little and leave it for a few days until nourishment flows to it; then bind it up.
But if none of those things that we have mentioned happens to the patient, it should not be loosened until after about twenty days.
Then the patient's hand is to be suspended from his neck, the arm being level, and he should guard carefully against agitated movements, and should sleep on his back.
You should know that this fracture of the arm mends in thirty or thirty-two days, and sometimes in twenty-eight, depending on the individual's constitution and the condition of his strength.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN.
On the repair of fractures of the palm and fingers.
Fractures of the metacarpus and of the small bones of the fingers very rarely occur; the only frequent occurrence is contusion.
When a fracture or crushing of the palm of the hand occurs the patient should sit cross-legged with a chair of the right height in front of him, on which he should put his outstretched hand.
Then an assistant is to extend the broken bones while the doctor straightens them so as to achieve a proper union.
Then a plaster and a dressing should be applied, if an effusion do not occur; then a splint over that, measured to the site and wrapped in a soft cloth.
If the fracture be lower down, near the inner part of the palm of the hand, make a ball of cloth, bid the patient grip on it with the fractured palm of his hand, and then bind it up with a long bandage.
The splint should be of leather that is somewhat soft, so as to fit into all the folds of the palm; and bandage it on suitably.
But if the fracture be on the outside you will have to put one splint above and another beneath the palm of the hand, to keep the hand opened and straight; then put on the bandage, carrying it round the hand and in and out between the fingers.
The fracture may occur to one of the small bones of the fingers. If it be the thumb, then set it in the proper way and bind it down to the palm of the hand; if you like you can apply a small straight splint to it to keep the fracture straight so that it does not shift.
If the break be in any of the other fingers, such as the middle or index or little finger or the ring finger, straighten it out and bind it to the sound finger next to it; or let them all be bound up one to another, which is better; or apply a small straight splint, as we said for the thumb.
While you are setting it, and afterwards, look out for an effusion and counteract it with what is required if anything of this sort occur, according to what has been repeatedly prescribed.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN.
On setting a fracture of the femur.
The femur is often broken, and this is readily discernible, for it will rotate forwards or backwards.
It is set by binding a bandage above the fracture and another below, while the patient lies flat on his face.
Then each assistant should make an even extension in his own direction, by the bandage. This is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, you should tie on a soft bandage of wool or something similar, at the root of the thigh toward the groin, so that extension may be applied above, and another bandage below the fracture.
Likewise if the fracture is near the knee the bandage should be near the knee, so that extension may be made downwards.
Then the doctor should straighten it out with both hands until he has reduced it to the pattern of the natural form and the bone unites neatly. Then you will have to apply the plaster and bandage if there is no effusion in the limb, but if there is an effusion leave it for a few days until the swelling has gone down, then resume your treatment.
As to the bandaging, you should wrap a firm broad sash two or three times round the fracture, leaving some over; then bind the leg up so that the heel is brought to reach the root of the buttock.
Then pass a long cord in the space between the thigh and the leg, low down near the knee, and let the ends of the cord come up on either side, then bind the rest of the sash over the leg and the thigh.
Then apply splints to the thigh at the very site of the fracture and put one of the splints on the leg-bone.
Then pack soft material in the space between the leg and the thigh to make the bandaging even.
Then start with three or four turns of a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture, and as you get away from the site of the fracture bind lighter and softer and looser.
Then turn to the two ends of the cord which you previously passed between the thigh and the leg, and with the cord bind the adjacent splints above, then carry the ends downward until you end up at the great tendon of the foot and with them bind also the extremities of the splints at the other end so that the bandaging will not shift from its place.
Then let the bandaging remain on as long as no pruritus or abscess or effusion or anything of that sort happens to the limb; but if any of these occur loosen it quickly and put right whatever has taken place, in the manner we have often mentioned.
If there be a penetrating fragment of the bone, you must reposition it if you can; but if not then cut down upon it and remove it and treat the wound in the sort of way mentioned previously, until it heals.
This fracture of the thigh is sometimes bandaged without bringing the leg alongside with splints, in the way we spoke of for the humerus and the forearm.
But setting after the former manner does not cause the patient any lameness; whereas if the femur is set alone without binding the leg to it the patient will inevitably be lame for always.
You must know that the femur knits in fifty days or a little more or less, according to the different constitutions and other circumstances.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN.
On setting a fracture of the patella of the knee.
You should know that the patella is rarely fractured, but crushing often occurs.
If a fracture does happen to it, it will be either a splitting or a shattering which may be simple or compound; and all these can be palpated.
Now the way to set is for the separated parts of it to be put right with the fingers, so that they unite and join as far as straightening and gentleness and skill can serve.
Then apply the plaster and put upon that a circular splint, if need be, and over that a suitable bandage.
Then keep an eye on it for all the conditions described for the other fractures, such as an effusion and the like, meeting whatever arises with what is good for it, until it is healed.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN.
On setting a fracture of the leg.
The leg consists of two bones. One of them is thick and is called 'leg bone' (tibia). The other is slender and is called 'fire-stick' (fibula).
Both of these are liable to the same kinds of fracture as occur in the two bones of the forearm, therefore the repair of them will be like that of the arm, and the operation is one and the same.
If both bones are broken together, the leg will turn in all directions.
If the fibula is broken there will be a forward deformity of the leg.
If the tibia be broken, and that low down, it will be obvious to you.
Employ levelling and extension and binding on of splints similar to that (sc.
But it will be necessary, if the fracture of the leg be a serious one with much fragmentation, for the extension to be gentler and lighter; and you must employ the utmost gentleness in setting it.
The operation on the leg involves one more process than that on the arm, namely, that when you have set the splints and have finished the task, you should take two strips of pine wood such as are used for roofing upstairs rooms, being put in the gaps of the planking, or they may be palm stalks; pick out such as are somewhat thick and not too thin; they should be as long as the leg from the knee down.
Then wrap each of them in a cloth folded into two longitudinally, and put one on each side of the leg; they should reach from the knee to the extremity of the foot.
Then tie the two strips in three places, namely at the two ends and in the middle; this binding prevents the leg from bending to right or left and it will be held in a good straight position.
Sometimes a 'gutter-splint' is used, made of wood according to the length of the leg; the leg is placed in this and it keeps the leg motionless.
This is particularly necessary in a compound fracture.
Then carefully examine the leg every day and use the utmost care to guard against effusion or swelling or other like things; and when anything of this sort happens employ the means to meet the case until it heals.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.
On fracture of bones of the foot and of the toes.
The heel is never fractured; but the bones of the foot sometimes are. The toes too are rarely fractured; but mostly they get crushed.
If a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot, and you see the bones riding over one another, let the patient plant his foot flat on the ground as if walking.
Then stand and put the sole of your foot on the prominent bones and with your foot put pressure upon them and level them to their proper place.
Then apply a bandage and some tow on top, and put under the inner part of the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads.
After you have wrapped them in material and so on, bind them tightly to the sole of the foot.
When three days or four have passed, loosen the binding and you will find the bones in position; whether they have been fractured or dislocated, the operation is (the same,) as you see.
If one of the toes be broken, reposition and straighten it in the way that I described for the fingers; then apply to the broken toe a splint of a length corresponding to the toe and a little wider than it. Then under the sole of the foot put the board that I have just described, and bandage it on firmly.
If the broken bones number two, three, or more, then apply over each toe a single splint measured to it, wrapped in soft material, and bind the board on the sole and let the flat portion of each of the two heads extend beyond the end of the sole of the foot, so that it may be held firmly.
And you must not forget to pay attention to all those contingencies that we have mentioned to you in other fractures; meet each contingency with the means proper to it.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.
On fracture of the female pudenda and of the pubic bone and of the male organ.
When a woman's pudenda are fractured, make her sit cross-legged, then bend her backwards little by little, being supported from behind.
Then let a midwife pack the vulva with cotton wool so as to form a kind of spherical packing in the vulva. Then shake the woman and by degrees elevate the dorsal spine, for the cotton wool will emerge until it is like a sphere at the opening and the fractured bone will be reduced.
Then put a pillow upon her back and when she wants to pass water gently remove the cotton wool so she may do so, then put it back in the same way in which it was put in at the first. Then she should return to her pillow as before.
She should do this for about seven days, then it will be mended.
If you prefer, take a sheep's bladder and bind a hollow reed to the opening of it; introduce the whole bladder into the pudenda and then blow hard into the tube so that the bladder is inflated within the passage and the fracture will then be reduced.
Then pack with cotton wool and let her wait a few days as we have described, until it be healed.
Now when a man or woman has the pubic bone broken you can use for the setting and repair of it the method we gave for a fracture of the hip.
The correct practice in these uncommon fractures, which very rarely happen, will be obvious, especially to one who has some experience and understands well this book of mine. For the fracture itself will in most cases indicate the correct way to repair it and bind it up, so use your intelligence.
When a man's organ is fractured, take a goose's neck and introduce the penis into it; then let it be wrapped and bandaged and left for about three days until it be healed.
CHAPTER NINETEEN.
On the repair of fractures accompanied by wounding.
When a man has a compound fracture, especially when it is a large bone such as the femur or humerus or the like, you should at once venesect him if the conditions are suitable for venesection as set out above.
If there is bleeding from the wound you must hasten to stanch it by sprinkling it with powdered vitriol if you have nothing else at hand.
Then begin on the reduction of the fracture the very same day; do not put it off unless an abscess occur.
But if an abscess does occur, leave the reduction until the ninth day so that the abscess may subside, and in no circumstances touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring evil consequences on him.
If the fractured bone be overriding the skin you must try to reduce it and to straighten it out by hand, gently and with moderate extension.
If reduction and straightening by hand is unsuccessful, then reduce it with this instrument; it is made of iron, seven or eight fingers' breadths long, and wide in proportion to the size of the wound; that is why the doctor should have three or four of them in the sizes he may need for treating every kind of fracture.
It should be round and somewhat thick so as not to bend when pressure is put upon it at the time of operating.
It should be sharp-ended with a bend at the end; the upper part should be of some thickness, but from the middle to the lower part it is a good bit thinner.
This is its form.
It is called in Greek bayram, meaning a small lever.
You must place the sharp incurved end of it over the end of the protruding bone, and push it firmly with it.
When the bone is repositioned and straightened in some measure, try to straighten the ends of the fracture, one to another.
If the fractured end be very thin and the instrument does not grip it firmly you will have to cut off that end so as to give purchase for the instrument.
If you cannot reduce the bone at all by the means we have described, cut it off with any of the osteotomes we have mentioned that is suitable, or saw it off with one of the saws as best you may.
Then strip away any remaining roughness of the bone and fine pieces of shell.
If, when you have reduced the bone, the patient feels severe and troublesome pain, you may know that the bone has not returned to its natural site. If you can restore it to its natural site, do so, for you will render the patient a signal service.
When your setting of the bone is complete, soak a dressing in dark sharp wine, especially if it be in summer, but do not put wax or anything oily upon the wound lest it cause putrefaction or corruption.
Then apply splints the moment you have finished setting the bone; and leave the wound open, that is, by making with scissors an opening in the coverings the size of the wound.
And take the utmost care not to bandage up a wound with a fracture; for many ignorant doctors have done that, thereby causing their patients either death or ulceration or a defluxion; so make your bandage soft and loose, as opposed to that of other fractures.
If the wound be severe or of great size and you fear for it some one of the grave accompaniments such as we have described, and the patient feels a disturbing pain at the place, then you should not put on splints; but instead of splints make wrappings of a stiff material and bind them on.
If, after one or two days have passed, you see that the wound is beginning to suppurate, remove the dressing with wine that you had put on it, and then apply the pads and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds, such as Tetrapharmacon ointment and the like.
Every evening and morning you will have to loosen the bandaging and carefully examine the wound until it knits and is healed. You must also place the limb in such a position as to let the pus flow down easily.
If, after many days, the wound is unhealed and it goes on suppurating, you may know that there are some little fragments of bone there; so you will have to examine the wound with a probe; and those fragments that are loose take and extract; and those that are not loose but nevertheless pierce the limb and cause pain, attempt to cut them out and extract them by whatever means you can.
If a defluxion or ulceration or other kind of corruption or putrefaction happen to the wound, you must meet all these occurrences with the proper remedy described before in its place.
One thing that is necessary is that you should comply with my words and keep them in mind: when a large bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the femur, the humerus, and the other bones of the long limbs, do not meddle with pulling or extracting it, for this often causes death; but leave it to suppurate. It may come away of itself in twenty or thirty days. Then dress the wound if you find occasion; if not, let be.
CHAPTER TWENTY.
On the treatment of the callus that remains from a fracture.
This callus often occurs after the healing of a fracture, especially one near a joint, and thereby the shape of the limb is spoilt; and sometimes there is limitation of the natural function of the limb.
Examine it, and if the callus be soft, apply astringent remedies to it, such as aloes, olibanum, myrrh, balsam of sarcocol, acacia, and the like. Take some or all of these; beat them up with a dry wine or egg-white or vinegar, apply to the callus on some tow and bind up firmly.
Leave the bandaging on for many days; then undo it and repeat until the callus is removed, God willing. Or bind on it a firm sheet of lead; for lead has the property of taking away lumps from limbs.
But if the callus is stony hard and its removal is urgent, incise the place and cut away the superfluous prominence, or pare it away with a scraper until it is gone; and dress the wound until it heals.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE.
On the treatment of a fracture when, after repair, the limb remains unnaturally thin.
When a fractured bone has been repaired but the limb remains thin and weak, this may be due to many causes: the bandaging being too often loosened and not properly tightened; or excessive binding-up so that nourishment cannot flow to the limb; or excessive fomenting; or excessive and premature movement; or the thinness and weakness of the patient's blood.
The treatment of this consists in the nourishing and restoring of his body so there be plenty of blood; and the use of the bath; and cheering the patient and making him happy, and so on.
Then apply pitch to the limb so that it may draw much nourishment to itself, or continue the massage to the limb with tepid water, so that nourishment flows in the limb and it returns to its normal shape.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO.
On the treatment of fractured bones when they mend crooked and are inhibited from their proper functioning.
When a limb that has been set has some distortion after healing, or the bone that was broken has some prominence or callosity, so that the limb is deformed, but there is nevertheless no limitation of its natural movement, then you should not listen to those who think that the bone should be broken again.
In our parts there have been many ignorant doctors and bone-setters who have done this. The operation is most blameworthy and leads to great dangers, death itself not being the worst possibility.
But if the distortion and callosity be recent you should massage it with an infusion of the herbs that have an emollient quality, such as leaves and roots of the marsh mallow, and melilot and the like: and apply one of the emollient plasters such as carefully prepared diachylon. Or take mucilage of the root of the marsh mallow and beat it up with chicken fat and oil of sesame, and let a cataplasm of these be applied. Or take a fat fig and beat it up with pigeon's dung; and the like remedies that are termed 'inhibitors of scarring'.
Sometimes also the callosity is resolved by long-continued gentle friction with the hands; and constant movement in every direction should also be applied.
But if the deformity be long-standing and fixed and hardened and you are compelled to treat it operatively, you will have to cut down on it from above, and free the junction of the bone, and with fine chisels cut away the redundant callus or bone; be gentle in this, with diligence and care.
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE.
Discourse on dislocations.
A dislocation is a displacement of any of the joints from its place, whereby the movement of the joint is hindered, the member is deformed, and the patient is caused violent pain and hurt.
When anyone sustains a dislocation he should hasten to have it reduced, not delaying it at all. For if it is delayed the place will swell up and the reduction will be thereby made difficult.
So it should not be delayed, nor moved or extended during the time it is swollen, for that often leads to spasm and excruciating pain.
Instead, when this occurs, you must hasten to venesect the patient, and then let be until the swelling has subsided a little. Then massage the member with hot water and oil and let it be gently reduced.
And treat every member with the things that will be mentioned in their place.
I have disposed the chapters on dislocations in the same order as the foregoing ones on fractures, that is, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the lower jaw.
It is rare indeed for the jawbones to be dislocated. Their dislocation may be in one of two ways: either they may shift slightly from their place and be a little relaxed; or they may be completely and utterly dislocated so as to be relaxed down toward the breast so that the patient's saliva runs out and he cannot control it; nor is he able to close his mouth, and he stutters in speaking.
If it be only a slight displacement it will go back in most cases spontaneously without much trouble.
But if the dislocation be complete and total it is necessary to set about the reduction of it at once without any delay.
This is done thus: an assistant holds the patient's head and the doctor introduces into his mouth the thumb of one hand at the root of the jaw, if it be a dislocation on one side, or both thumbs if it be a bilateral dislocation, with the rest of the fingers outside to keep it straight. Then let him bid the patient relax his jaws and allow them to move in any direction; while the doctor sets the dislocation, thrusting the jaw until it return to its proper place.
If the reduction be difficult, especially if it be a bilateral dislocation, administer a fomentation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both sides may be facilitated. And on no account delay the reduction, as we have said.
When the reduction and straightening have been done and the patient's mouth closes and is not relaxed, then apply to both sides dressings steeped in wax prepared from wax and oil of roses. Then bind it up gently, with a loose bandage.
The patient should sleep lying on his back with his head held between two pillows so that he does not move it either to right or to left; nor should he burden himself with chewing but should be on a diet of broth of corn starch until the pain is gone and the jaw is firm; then he may eat whatever he wishes.
Let him use it gently; let him not work his mouth heavily in eating or drinking or yawning until the jaw is firmly knit and healed.
If the reduction of both sides is hard when it is a simultaneous bilateral dislocation, and there is no return to the proper position, then thereby in many cases fevers and perpetual headaches occur; sometimes the patient's belly is loosened and he vomits actual bile.
When you see this you will know that he is doomed; in most cases in which this happens death follows in ten days.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE.
On the reduction of a dislocation of the clavicle and of the head of the humerus.
The clavicle is never dislocated inwards because of its continuity with the breast-bone; but sometimes it is dislocated outwards, and then it is detected by palpation.
The replacement is thus: the patient is to lie on his back and stretch out both arms; then with the palm of your hand press heavily upon the place and it will go back.
Then apply to it the plaster and pads, and bandage it up.
As to the extremity of the clavicle, which is close to the shoulder and joined to it, it is only rarely dislocated; but if ever it is dislocated you must reduce it and set it straight as we have mentioned, by any convenient means.
Then apply the plaster, pads, and bandages, and bid the patient keep quiet and still until it is healed.
By this same treatment you may also reduce the head of the humerus when it is displaced.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX.
On the reduction of a dislocation of the humerus.
You should know that there are three ways in which the humerus may be dislocated.
One is a dislocation down into the axilla, another is a dislocation toward the breast; it may also be dislocated upward, which is rare. It is not dislocated backward, because of the scapula; nor is it dislocated forward, on account of the tendons.
Mostly it is dislocated and displaced down into the axilla, and particularly in those of a spare build; in such it quickly comes out and quickly goes back. But in those of a fleshy build it is the opposite; it comes out with difficulty and goes back with difficulty.
Sometimes a man suffers a blow or a fall, so that the upper arm swells up with an effusion, whence he forms the opinion that there is a dislocation.
So you must examine it to make sure of it and then proceed to treat it.
A dislocation down into the axilla may be diagnosed by comparing the sound and the dislocated humerus; for you will find an obvious difference between them; you will find a hollow at the head of the humerus, and in the axilla the head of the humerus may be palpated like an egg, and the patient is unable to lift his hand to his ear, and full movements are restricted.
Similarly if it is displaced toward the breast or upward you will find it obvious to the touch and not hidden.
The reduction of this dislocation will be quite simple if it be only recent or the patient be a child.
To reduce it, his hand should be lifted up by an assistant, then you should put both your thumbs under his axilla and lift the joint up powerfully into its place, while the assistant lifts and stretches his hand upward; then he puts it down and the dislocation will at once go back.
If it is not reduced by the means we have stated, being a dislocation of many days' standing, the patient should take a hot bath and use relaxing and softening fomentations, such as decoction of marsh mallow root and fenugreek and melilot.
Then the patient should lie on his back and you put under his axilla a ball of wool of moderately hard consistency. Then the doctor should put his heel on the ball and grasp the patient's hand and draw it downward, while pushing the ball with his foot, and it will straightway be reduced.
Or, if you prefer, reduce it in this way: get a man taller than the patient to stand on one side and pass his shoulder under the patient's axilla and lift it up until the patient is suspended in mid-air, while another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards his lower abdomen (if the patient is light it will be necessary to hang a weight from him); then the dislocation will straightway be reduced.
It is also reduced by another method: that is, to fix in. the ground a long spar of wood; its head should be of a round shape like the pestle of a mortar, neither massive nor slender; then after a soft pad has been put on the head of the spar it should be placed under the axilla of the patient, who should be standing alongside the spar; then let his hand be drawn downward on one side and his body on the other, powerfully. Then the joint will immediately return to its place.
If it proves difficult to reduce it by any of the means we have stated, employ this treatment: take a wooden spar some two cubits in length, two fingers thick, and four wide; it should have a round head to facilitate its introduction into the hollow of the axilla; of this shape.
Then you bind on the round head soft rags so that the wood will not hurt the patient.
Then it is placed under the patient's axilla, and his whole hand and arm are stretched down over the spar, which is to be bound down to the upper arm, the forearm, and the tip of the hand.
Then let the arm be placed cross-wise over the rung of a ladder and the hand stretched downward, and let the rest of the body hang down on the other side; then the joint will very quickly go back.
Once it has gone back properly, in whatever way is possible, there should be put under the axilla a ball of wool of moderate size; then apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust with olibanum and egg-white, all round the shoulder. Then firmly bandage the ball under the axilla and carry the bandaging round over the plaster. Sling his hand from his neck, then let him be left without moving his hand for a week.
The patient's diet should be light until the limb gets strong, for that will hasten the cure.
After five or seven days it can be unfastened and he can make trial of its movement; if it is firm and not slack then it is healed.
If the joint is frequently dislocated, on account of a humidity arising in it or some other cause, then use should be made of the cautery with three prongs spoken of earlier, in the book on cauterizations.
If you do all this and loosen the bandaging after a week and the joint is still not firm, and you repeatedly plaster it and bandage it, and it is still loose and comes down and dislocates and you are unable to raise it up, then you may know that the tendons at the head of the humerus are either cut through or stretched or loosened; in which case you may know that the joint will never stay firm in its place.
As to the dislocation toward the chest and breast, and posteriorly, the reduction of this is done by thrusting and extension with both hands until it goes back.
And apply the usual bandaging and treatment until it is healed.
If, after it has healed, a callosity arises in it, and it is slow in movement, the patient should take frequent hot baths until that callosity is softened and the member returns to its original condition.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the elbow.
The elbow is with difficulty dislocated and with difficulty put back. Now dislocation may be in all directions, and particularly forward and backward. Whatever way it is dislocated it will not be concealed from you, because it is both visible and palpable, and whenever you compare the dislocated elbow with the sound one it is quite openly and plainly manifested; for the elbow joint is hollow and the patient cannot flex the forearm back or touch his shoulder with it.
You must hasten and reduce the dislocation as rapidly as possible before an abscess occur. For if an abscess occur the reduction of it is difficult and maybe it will never be healed; especially when it is a posterior dislocation, for this is the worst and most painful of all the kinds of dislocation, and often it is fatal.
Now when it is one of those that can be reduced, the way to reduce it is for an assistant to perform a two-handed extension of the patient's hand, the patient's forearm being opened out, while the doctor's hands are above and below the elbow joint and he thrusts the joint with both thumbs together or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
If it be an anterior dislocation, it may go back if the hand is bent sharply back until it strikes its own shoulder with the root of the palm.
If the dislocation does not respond to reduction, apply very strong and powerful extension.
For this, let two assistants pull on the arm while two other assistants hold the patient against the extension.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions after the limb has been wrapped in a long folded cloth or a broad wrapper.
When the doctor begins manipulating the joint he should anoint his hands with oil so as to assist, by its lubrication, the movement of the joint; then he should thrust the joint powerfully until it goes back.
After its reduction he should apply to it a plaster having some styptic and absorbent qualities, with egg-white; and put on a firm bandage and suspend the patient's arm from his neck and leave it for some days.
Then undo it; and if the joint remains fixed in its place, then untie the bandaging and leave it.
If you see that the joint is not thoroughly firm, replace the plaster and bandaging and leave it for a few more days until it is firm; then untie it.
If, after the reduction and unbandaging of the joint, it becomes stiff and is difficult to move, soften it in the bath and apply gentle friction and massage until it is softened, or apply to the joint the tail of a fat-tailed sheep; bind it on and leave it on for a day and a night; then remove it and send him to the bath, and when he sweats apply moderate friction to the joint; then replace the tail and again and again, alternating with the bath, until the joint softens.
If you prefer, apply to it, and bandage on, fresh cow-dung lightened with butter. Do this a number of times and it will soften and return it to its original state.
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the wrist.
The carpus of the hand is often dislocated. Unlike other joints, the reduction is easy, but there should be haste to reduce it as soon as it is dislocated, before the place swells or an abscess occur.
The way of reducing the dislocation is to place the patient's wrist upon a board while an assistant stretches the hand, and the doctor puts the palm of his hand upon the prominence of the joint and applies pressure on it until it goes back.
But he should examine: if it is a displacement toward the ventral aspect of the hand, the patient should place the back of his hand upon the board for extension and reduction; but if it be a luxation toward the dorsum of the hand, then the inner part of the hand should be laid upon the board so that the doctor's hand may come upon the prominence of the joint itself.
If it go back at once, good; but if not, bandage it with a plaster that settles swelling and let it be. Do not revert to it, for it will not tolerate that, and you will not be able to effect its reduction after some days have passed.
But the joint will retain its deformity; and the patient will in no wise be harmed except if his hand is slackened so that he be unable to grip anything; then you may know that the tendons are either severed or bruised. In this situation there is no method but to strengthen it by cauterization; this sometimes helps but sometimes is of no use at all.
When the reduction of the joint is complete, apply to it the plaster we have described, then bandage it and leave it for five days; then loosen it and try out the hand.
If movement be hampered and any hardness occur in it, soften it repeatedly with hot water and sweating until it be softened.
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
The fingers may be dislocated in any direction.
When one of the fingers is dislocated dorsally or ventrally, then extend the finger and thrust the dislocation with your thumb until it goes back.
Then bind the head of the phalanx, suspending it in the direction in which it was dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then unbind it and extend it so that it may straighten out all that day.
Then at nightfall bind it in just the same way. Continue to loosen it by day and to exercise it with movement, bandaging it by night. Do this for some days until it is knit.
Do the same with it if it is a ventral dislocation, binding it in that direction, and treat it as explained above until it is healed.
Do likewise with dislocations in other directions.
CHAPTER THIRTY.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
When any of the vertebrae of the back or the neck are completely dislocated or a number of vertebrae are displaced, there is no treatment in this case for death is hastening toward the patient.
The sign of this is that the injured man passes a motion involuntarily, being unable to hold it back; often too some of his limbs go limp, either both legs or both arms or one of them. If, as often happens, a single vertebra is displaced, the displacement may be in any of four directions.
When there is a displacement backwards it is called 'curvature of the spine'.
As to its treatment: examine it; if the curvature dates from childhood then there is no treatment or cure at all for it.
As for the sort that occurs from a fall or a blow or the like, the Ancients indulged in lengthy dissertations thereon, giving many kinds of treatment, the greater part of which is of no use. But I have abbreviated from it, making a little which will serve in place of their much, consisting in my clarification and exposition of the sense. I have also depicted the instrument differently from their account and their explanation.
The only curvature that can be treated is that of the dorsal spine exclusively, by the means I now describe.
The patient should be stretched prone upon a level bench near a wall, and a soft palliasse should be spread under him so that his chest may not be hurt.
Then put a straight spar, set in a hole in the ground at the end of the bench where his head is, and another spar where his feet are at the other end of the bench.
Let an assistant hold this spar, which is not to be firmly fixed in the hole, while another assistant holds the other in the same way.
Then wind round the patient's chest and beneath his axillae a soft strong wrapper, and stretch one end of the wrapper to the spar at his head, and tie it to it. Then bind other wrappers: over his hips, his knees, and by both tendons of Achilles; then bring the wrappers together and tie them to the other spar at his feet.
Then each assistant extends the spar with the tie towards himself; the two spars will not shift from their places in which they are planted, but, as we have said, they are not to be fixed.
Meanwhile the doctor is to press hard with both his palms upon the spine until it goes back; or he may place a board upon it and apply pressure to the board with his feet until it goes back.
But if it does not go back under this treatment then let a board be taken, about three cubits long, and let a place be hollowed out in the wall, which, as we said, should be near the patient, into which you put the end of the board; then place the mid-point of the board upon the hump, and he—the doctor—should place both his feet on the other end and strongly thrust upon the spine until it is forced back into position.
If you wish you may operate by means of a winch turned by hand; thus: you fix in the ground at the head of the patient, at one end of the bench, two wooden spars each one cubit long; and the same at the lower end, at his feet; there should be the distance of a span between the spars (of each pair).
Then you introduce a round piece of wood, the shaft on which the rope is wound, into the two openings of the two wooden spars.
At one end of each shaft is a hole into which is firmly fixed a piece of wood a span long by which it is wound. Likewise with the other two spars.
Then bind the wrapper that you have bound round his chest to the shaft at the patient's head, and those bound round his legs to the shaft at his feet.
Then have an assistant standing at each shaft to turn with his hand the handle by which the shaft is revolved, while the doctor straightens out the curvature in the way we have described.
After the spine has been restored and the place has been straightened it will be necessary for you to apply an absorbent plaster with egg-white, then packing, then over the plaster apply a flat splint about three fingers wide and long enough to cover the site of the curvature and several sound vertebrae on either side.
Then let it be bandaged as is needful and let the patient follow a mild diet until he is cured.
If after he is healed there still remains some prominence at the site, it will be necessary to employ remedies to relax and soften the parts, together with the use for a long time of the flat splint we described; in this case a leaden plate may be employed.
Sometimes there occurs a prominence at the end of the dorsal vertebrae, from which one may form the opinion that there is a dislocation, whereas it will be a superfluous bone that has become prominent; do not interfere with it by this treatment, for death may result.
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
You should know that a complete dislocation alone is sustained by the hip and shoulder joints; they do not sustain the lesser displacements, with concavity, as do the other joints.
Now the hip joint is dislocated in four directions, interior, exterior, posterior, and anterior.
Most commonly it is dislocated interiorly; and rarely is it dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly.
The indication of an internal dislocation is that when you compare the patient's sound leg with the injured leg it will be longer and the knee will be prominent as compared with that of the sound leg; nor will it be possible for the patient to flex the foot back on the groin; and there will be an obvious swelling near the groin because the head of the femur has moved there.
The sign of the occurrence of an external dislocation: the symptoms will be the exact contrary to these.
The sign of an anterior dislocation is that the patient can stretch his leg out fully but cannot flex it without feeling pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk he will be unable to walk forward; and he has retention of the urine and his groin swells, and in walking he hobbles upon his heel.
The sign of a posterior dislocation is that he cannot extend the knee, nor can he flex it before flexing the hip; also the leg will be shorter than the other, the groin will be relaxed, and the head of the femur will be evident at the lumbar region.
As to the reduction of the various forms of this dislocation, you must examine the case and if it be an old dislocation which the patient has suffered from for a long time and the reduction of which has not been contrived and which remains as it was, there is no treatment for it at all, nor should any be attempted.
But in that case whose dislocation is recent, whichever of the four kinds of dislocation it be, hasten to rotate the joint and extend it internally and externally and move it to the right and the left; for often it will return and no further treatment will be needed.
But if it does not go back thus, you must have ready a sturdy and powerful assistant to extend the leg from below, either with both his hands or with a wrapper bound upon the leg above the knee; while another assistant pulls from above by putting his hands under the patient's axillae; then you should bind a soft wrapper upon the root of the thigh, with a third assistant to hold the end of the bandage.
Then extension should be made either anteriorly from the direction of the groin to the direction of the clavicle, or posteriorly toward the dorsal spine.
Let them all make their extension simultaneously so the patient is lifted up bodily and remains suspended.
This kind of extension is common to all four kinds of dislocation.
If the dislocation goes back by the way we have said, good. Otherwise, each kind must have the special treatment I shall describe.
When it is an internal dislocation then the special reduction is for the patient to lie upon his sound side; then apply a wrapper to the root of the hip in the space between the head of the femur and the part below the groin; then carry the bandage upward from the groin toward the upper part of the body, in the direction of the clavicle.
Then another powerful and sturdy assistant is to take hold of his arms while the thick part of the afflicted thigh is clasped and strongly extended outward; then it will return to its place.
This kind of treatment is easier than the others for the reduction of this limb.
But if you find it refractory and it does not answer to this method of treatment, then the patient's two feet will have to be bound together with a strong soft bandage round his two ankles and his two knees.
The distance from each to the next should be four fingers, and the injured leg should be stretched two fingers beyond the other.
Then the patient is to reach upward and grasp any beam that may be in the house; he should be about two cubits from the floor.
Then tell a powerful servant to clasp the head of the hip and another servant to hang from the patient; and the other servant, the one who is clasping the hip, should thrust powerfully; then the hip will speedily go back.
The special method of reduction in the case of an external dislocation: it will be necessary for the patient to be lying on a bench after the manner described for the one with a curvature of the spine; but wrappers are to be tied only on the injured leg and the chest.
Then the two spars are to be set in position, one at his feet and another at his head; and have an additional spar firmly fixed in the middle of the bench and wrapped in soft cloth so as not to injure the patient; this spar is to be between his thighs so that he will not be dragged down during extension.
Then each assistant is to pull in his own direction while the doctor sets the hip with his hands.
When it is an anterior dislocation, extension will have to be applied forcefully to the patient's leg, on the bench, exactly as described; the doctor should place the palm of his right hand upon the injured groin and then apply pressure with the other hand, directing the pressure so as to make extension downward toward the knee.
If it is a posterior dislocation the patient must not be raised above the ground and extended downward; rather must he be placed upon something hard, in the manner that we prescribed for an external displacement of the hip: he is to lie prone on the bench with the bands tied as we said before.
It will also be necessary to apply pressure with the board to the site to which the joint has been displaced.
When the proper reduction of the joint is completed—the signs of reduction will be plain to you; namely, that you extend both the patient's legs, and when you see that both legs are of equal length and the patient can draw up and stretch out the leg without difficulty, then you may know that the limb has gone back as it should—then bring both thighs together, apply the plaster and bind with a sash so that the hip does not move in any direction; and the patient is to keep perfectly quiet for three or four days.
Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other.
If you see that they are both the same size you may know that the dislocation is cured and you can allow the patient to walk freely.
But if you see any slackening then repeat: replaster and rebandage as you did at first, and leave for another three days. Then unfasten.
Then unfasten. He should be cautious about walking on it for some days, until it is thoroughly strong, God willing.
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO.
On dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways; it is dislocated interiorly and exteriorly and inferiorly, that is, posteriorly. It is never dislocated anteriorly.
The sign of dislocation is to bid the patient flex his leg on his thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh you may know the knee is dislocated.
The way of setting all the types of dislocation is to make the patient sit down with both legs extended, if he can, with an assistant sitting behind him to hold him by the middle and incline him slightly backward. Then do you yourself sit on his thighs with your back to his front, and put his leg between yours; then the palms of your hands should be applied to his knee, and join them together by twining the fingers; then with the palms put strong pressure on both sides of his knee while another assistant extends his foot until the knee goes back to its place.
The sign of its return is that the leg can be flexed back easily and without hindrance upon the thigh.
Then apply a plaster and flex the leg on to the thigh and bandage them together for three or four days; then loosen them.
He should do little walking for some days until it gains strength.
But if you cannot effect reduction by this method, apply powerful extension by bandages as we have described above for the treatment of the hip, until it goes back.
CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes slightly displaced, sometimes fully dislocated, the dislocation being either internal or external.
The sign of its dislocation is that you will see the ankle swollen, and projecting on the side to which it is dislocated.
As to the treatment of its displacement, the reduction of it is easy: if it is gently extended with the hands and straightened, it will go back.
As to treatment when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient sit upright with a strong and sturdy assistant holding him about the middle from behind.
Then hold the dorsum of the foot with your right hand, and with the left grasp the foot from below about the heel.
Then draw the foot toward you with your right hand, then with the left, twice. Then extend it with the left hand and thrust the metatarsus with the right hand without violence toward the leg.
Do this as we have described, twice.
Then thrust the metatarsus toward the leg a third time while exerting traction at the heel.
If it goes back in one or two attempts thus, and you see the foot is straightened, well and good. If not, repeat the operation and it will go back.
If you find it impossible to reduce it by what we have said, make the patient lie on his back on the ground and firmly fix in the ground between his thighs a stake wrapped in material so as not to hurt him.
Then an assistant should grasp his thigh and another assistant should extend the foot, either manually or with a cord tied round the narrow part of it; the assistants should pull one against another, with the stake upright between the patient's thighs holding him so that his body will not be dragged down with the extension.
Then the doctor should straighten out the dislocation with both hands, while another assistant holds down the sound leg; then the dislocation will speedily go back.
Then when the dislocation is reduced and the soundness of the reduction is manifested to you, apply a plaster and packing, bandage firmly and bind the foot downwards.
You will have to be careful of the tendon above the ankle at the back, not to bandage tightly over it so as to injure it.
Then leave him for two or three days; and if the binding works loose, tighten it up.
Then on the third or fourth day loosen it, but the patient is to abstain from walking for forty days, for if he tries to walk before this lapse of time you cannot be sure that the dislocation will not collapse and corruption set in and thereafter be incurable.
If an abscess occur you must allay it by the application of such dressings and embrocations as we have already described more than once, until it is gone.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Any that are dislocated must be straightened by means of gentle extension, without violence; that is not hard but positively easy.
If the dislocation be in one of the joints of the dorsum of the foot, the patient must set his foot on level ground or upon a board, standing as though walking.
Then you must stand and put your foot on what protrudes of those joints, and put strong pressure upon it with your foot until it goes back and you see that it is evened out and there is no prominence at the place.
Then put under the sole of his foot a flat splint with two heads to take the whole foot, and bind it on with a tight and secure bandage for three days; then loosen it; but keep him from walking for a good many days until it binds and you are sure it will not revert, God willing.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE.
On the kinds of dislocation that accompany a wound or a fracture or both.
When anything of this kind happens and you attempt treatment and restoration, death is a frequent sequel.
Therefore such treatment should be undertaken only by a person that is skilled in the art, has long experience, is dexterous, sympathetic, cautious, and not reckless or over-bold. To begin with he should apply only remedies for the allaying of abscesses and then leave the patient to Divine providence, unless, of course, the injury is light enough to give some hope of his escaping death; in which case you should set out to reduce it at once before an abscess arise.
If the part goes back as you wish, employ the treatment for allaying abscesses and dress the wound with suitable desiccant ointments.
If it be a dislocation with a fracture and there occur splintered fragments in the bone, try to remove them, following therein the instructions relating to the simple diseases we have mentioned before in their place.
Use your utmost diligence; keep clear of entering upon a course with a dangerous outcome, as I have enjoined on you before. For this will best ensure the continuance of your prestige and safeguard your good name, God willing.
