Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the rules of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for the completion of its consequence, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you complete it at your own pace in this treatise, which is a part of the operation with my hand, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the operation with my hand is spread throughout our region and in our time of total privacy, until they strongly perceive the science of it, and its vigilance is established; and no one remained of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the hands and endeavor to correct those errors and hesitations until the intentions of it are closed and its force is elongated and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you will vivify this order of this treatise in the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may come into possession of the forms of the ferramentz of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, as it is for addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why no artificial expert is found in our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and it covers the actor who needs to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen discovered until he knew the juvenation of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and he had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the number of them, and their size; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their issuance.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for that Hippocrates said that a name is a word, mostly in small works, and greatly in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already said that in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not exempt from error, for which they will be mortally wounded, thus you have seen many of them, because few are formed in this science and get away from it with their experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has inadvertently induced an scrophilous abscess in the neck of a woman, and has cut some arteries of the neck so that great bleeding occurs until the woman almost dies between his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who pretended that he would remove a stone from a man's bladder, which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and performed a trephine operation on the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called him a destroyer of that, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and because of the disposition of the patient's body, he would know that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he ended up with a black crust that was on the fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he destroyed the fracture, above the wound, with poultices and astellas in strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he dislocated according to his own desires, and then he relieved, and then he left it for several days and commanded that we should not touch the limb; and it was thus until the thigh and the foot became apostematous, and he came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have already called him a destroyer, and he was unable to dislocate the limb, and consequently it was tranquilized and thus he was free from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that he could not restrain it, and he did not cease to walk with the corruption in the limb until the patient became worse.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and he ulcerated it for several days, until the malice of it was magnified in his lord's sight.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cancerous tumor was pure melancholic humor, then it did not cover that it would come to him with iron of all, but rather it was in a member which suffered from all, as if it had been held.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for that, sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with my hand is divided into two devotions: one is an operation associated with health, and another work in which there is danger in major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in every place of this book where you found operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the fools do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are abolished and confirmed.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And you will be on the best way for the grace of God, persevering in salvation and laudable success, and you will leave the terrible evils of difficult healing, and you will put away your arms from that which makes you fear, so that you may establish faith in your heart and in your name you may not be evasive: because more remains to your glory, and afterwards in the world and finally to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Because there are many useless medicines:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	There is no medicine for evil, because bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first partition.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the preparations of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second partition.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on suction and perforation, and on cupping glasses, and on poultices, and on the extraction of arrows and on similarities to those, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third partition.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twisted limbs and similarities to those; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and acute medicine and recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Here begins the treatise on the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will discuss the quality of the juices of that cautery and of its instruments, and in which complexions it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juice of cautery and its instrument is long and prolix, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant, and I need a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery confers on the whole universal complexion, which is either material or non-material, except for two complexions, which are cold complexions without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the cold and dry complexions there is discord; for some said that cautery is juice against that, and others said the contrary, that cautery is not convenient in evil complexions which are by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that evil cold and dry complexions are healed by cautery which is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say to him who says the contrary, that by cautery it is made juice in all evil cold and dry complexions that are found in men's bodies, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man to be cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say through the sermon of that, that I have experimented and already discovered many times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Moreover, I do not know that someone has written about that which is already experienced and exercised in the chapter on cautery through previous exercise, and has known the diversity of complexions in men's bodies and the disposition of evils in their metesises, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	Moreover, in the other complexions, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and humid evils, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree on the juice with cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its goodness, so on cautery as combined medicine, is because fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not harm another member unless it is a small nuisance.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Moreover, the action of combined medicine penetrates to that in the members which are afflicted by it, and strongly makes them come into the difficult-to-heal member and strongly helps them.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Moreover, fire, by its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not make anything except that it overflows; and it is already known to us through experiment and long service of study in the art about the truth of causes; and for this I have excused the length of the sermon; and if it were not that I do not read my own book in this passage to you, secretly hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion through which it expels evils, a philosophical demonstration sermon, which will be acute in your pious pages.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to use cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the nuisance from the accidental time is submerged in the juice of that which is attracted by cautery, and especially if cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fast, which do not suffer delay so that it is feared for those that bring evil, which is greater than small nuisance entering for a short time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus I do not catch in your pages, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that evil which is healed by cautery, it does not return at all times, and pauses that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not so, because they do not understand that cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humidity which are causes for why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	More masters excel in superficial medicine for the will to validate their worth and virtue of their operation and greatness of their lord's sense.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their illness, and its virtue, and what has been prepared in their body by the aggregation of superfluous fluids, and what they have acquired through their habits and similarities with those causes; but that the illness for which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in few superfluous and humid parts, thus as if cauterization is done for toothache and similar to that, it is possible that the pain does not return there, more so it happens in small children.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common speech is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not to what they understand in it, because they believe that it is not a cure that profits from medicine nor another cause that profits from cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is not but when we administer various methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause we administer thus cauterization, and it profits from that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And henceforth I say that cauterization is not the last resort of medicine, but according to the intention which understands the common people and many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that gold cauteries are better than iron cauteries, and they did not say so except for the equality of gold and the limitation of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cauterization does not make a scar, as if it is not absolutely virtuous, because you have already practiced and experienced that it does not do so except in certain bodies among others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said; but more masters when you make cauterization with a focus of gold, it is not for you to declare, because it is according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and prepare to receive freshness; and if you adjust on top of the ignition, the gold makes a focus for the fire, and in the fire some laminas are made so that the artisan can occupy himself with that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore it is done to make cauterization with iron, we do not push lightly and do not approach closely to the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that one can lift the demanding part that wants it from them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterization of head pain due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers on the humidity and coldness above the servile accident of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of swelling and multitude of flux rheumatic, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and eyebrows fluent, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and of gout, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and similarly in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate in medicine laxative the whole mind, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and their age and their custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his whole head with a razor, and then do so that he sits between his thighs on a heated bench and places his hands over his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor of your palm then put your fingers on the razor at the bridge of the nose between the eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More masters, since the finger said of my own place is arrived, signifying that place with a probe, and then ignite the olive oil cauterization of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the sensitive place with a probe, in a way that descends, at which the finger of the hand is constricted little by little, and you turn that around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and regard the place, and if you see that some quantity of the head is discovered, thus as the quantity of grains of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to your hand in that iron, in another of that, if it is inflamed, until it is seen by the eye what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve that over the place and leave that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place it on the sewn wound in a bandage and leave that on until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with four-part medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the Roman plague breaks out, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more youthful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that some of them who are cauterized on the back of the eye, and hold the cautery until it is adhered to some part of the spectacle of the eye.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And it is necessary to adjust what adheres to the bone, and it is necessary to cure.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	There are others who apply the cautery to the rear, until it penetrates into the bone strongly, so that the bone is seized, and this is the method of small abscesses.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place exudes the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And it has been held in the open wound for a long time, and it is necessary to cure until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two special kinds of cauteries in total, unless in some homes according to the way of fear; and therefore, you should tell me, it is better for my health, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity of the aforementioned, as we have testified in other members, and mainly when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cautery is most safe and better for me; and from that house and I do that work for my health.
Capitol segon.	Following chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the entire head is affected by chronic and long pain, and it is in prolonged illness, and uses remedies of gerras and cochias and capipurges and emplaustres and guatz and cadels and gualinas and semblantz, and mainly if it has been cauterized with a cautery that recounts and does not alleviate any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and atrophied from great cold, then that cauterying is another kind of cautery beneath that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And it is necessary to cautery above the horn of the dry head with a cautery until the cord is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the cord and discover the bone with the quantity that we have recounted and cautery it with a cautery in the rear part of the head at the place called "vas" - and it is that place where the wind is paused.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in that way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient suffers from great diverse pain, unlike the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you will direct this cautery to its place, because it is known that the cautery is the one that cauteries the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the method of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-ancient migrating [humors].
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the head, or it is extended to the vein, then evacuate with medicines that mundify the head, and another cure should be administered, which you have described in the divisions of illnesses; and if all does not alleviate, then cauterying is done in two ways: either cauterying with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	A cauterying with acute burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and scrape it and bind the extremities of it to both ends of the heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And it is necessary to incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it reaches the bone beneath the cord, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And it is necessary to apply pressure above it with a stopped descent constriction, and let it be for three hours; and then dislodge it and draw out the alum, and let the wound be for two or three days, and then pause on the covered area submerged in water until the place makes a scab.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see, make those some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	A cauterying with iron is done according to this method: ignite for cautering of which this is the form.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a form of key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And it is necessary to pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the acidity which is beneath does not hurt — and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is hurt by the specificity of the cord is as much as the size of it, and hold your hand so that the artery is not hurt beneath, so that there is no flux of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to soak the area in salt water and pause it on the place, and let it be for three days; and then pause the area wrapped in bandage, and cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cautery the extremity of the cutaneous area according to cautery, and beware of incision of the artery in this non-ancient migrating [humors] properly.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cautery of ancient migrating [humors].
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an acute case that we have spoken of in the previous treatment, and what we have said about the divisions of the illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes for the illness that does not respond to what we have said about the first cautery in medicine or the cautery in focus, then it is necessary that you ignore the cautery cut into the skin so that it becomes white, since it indicates on the line of the long bone where the greatest pain is; and place your hand for a while and strengthen it until you reach the artery and penetrate to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is necessary for you to take care of the continuity of the jawbone, which is essential for chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves are not damaged in a way that would hinder its function.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is affected, because in its affection there is fear, and major attention to the one who ignores what it does and is not studied and experienced; and thus the operation begins on it at the commencement.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find a reminder of the rule for the flow of blood in the affected artery according to its own manner, in the same place of this free book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and you see the body of the patient is tolerable, then cauterize it in the same place on the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the stretching of the arteries with cautery having two horns, and it is a better cauterization than this one and more convenient.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with causal laxatives and other treatments which we have said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has been named punctured, of which this is the form.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And point the cautery to the ignition, and it is led to the environment of the whole ear in a circular motion, or in the circle of some points if the pain is in some.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Gradually move the cautery along the root of the ear, little by little, until you reach the spot where you feel it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you make points with the cautery all over the ear, and in this way, and then treat the spots until they are healthy.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of gout.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Gout which is treated and cauterized is not only of the species that come through fluxion, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	It is necessary to cauterize the species that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of gout with herbs and purging and evacuations, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your hand on the cautery for the opposite part of the affected limb, because mollification is only effective in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, just above the horn of the head, and on the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the pain in the finger, and place your hand on the cautery until the quantity of the greatest pain of the specific code is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of cutting instrument, the form of which is described in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	Moreover, it is necessary to subtly understand that one should not be too confident; and it is necessary to cut into the excess fat a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the spot where it is described in the process until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When old apoplexy is treated and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not work and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with the cautery on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more inferior; and then it is treated with what proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by fluxion.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give to the patient at the beginning large pills and servant mondificants.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then take away the whole head of the patient and place it on the wooden board described in the treatise on emplasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Put aside those withered leaves, because that is a handle for the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to the measure of the order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And then if the health of the patient is good; and if not, then make three cauteries on the back part of their head, which descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then take care to make the cauteries in such a way that it is properly done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you find the patient is tolerant, then make the cautery in a suitable place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Take care that it enters so that it heals; and let the olive-shaped cautery be made according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	So that you proceed in mondification of the head with oils and with what we have said; and take away the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in a suitable place on the head, and cauterize above all the horns of the head, and cauterize above the back part of it, and make three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to treat those who are tolerant patients and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make a cautery so that it is combined with the code of the same, and raise the dead flesh.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And take care that it enters so that it heals, and let this cautery be olive-shaped.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not the epileptic who is cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to flux.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And then it is necessary to mondify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and the other cure which we have described in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot take the medicines, then administer gentle and mild servings of mondifying service, beforehand for some days, with a good purification of the veins.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And take away the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in a suitable place on the head according to the preceding manner, and another cautery on the occiput of it, and above each horn of the head it is cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the olive-shaped cautery be according to what has been previously stated.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply subtle cauteries according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and gross flaccidity, then cauterize it with the cauteries which we have said in the treatment of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him a purging drink that mondifies his brain according to what has been stated in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And take away the patient's head, and then make a decent tortoise-shaped figure on the circle, and then place it in a suitable place on the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated comfortably, and hold him firmly from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and it is also worthy of healing old wounds.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for temperate warmth by measure, which the patient suffers when it is in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that in a suitable place on the head of the patient in the circle, and let it enter so that it is refreshed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do it so that the patient is in total remission for one week, with another regimen of his good into being healthy; or if you wish, cauterize it making small points according to the size of it, but keep your hand on a cautery thus ordered: this is a special kind of cautery which humidifies the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that cooked in a binding or in gray wrappers of wadding.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On cauterization of water descending into the whirl.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the whirl through the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what mondifies his head, and guard him from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And that swelling should be treated in a bath for ten days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave the head, and cauterize that same spot with a cautery; and then cauterize that same spot with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of inflammation in two veins, or one vein if it is the beginning of inflammation in one vein.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	You should cautery all the veins and arteries that you find in the codena; and place the cauteries in that long area in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauteryzed; and if you see the fluxes of blood, or stop the same medicine, which is as much as possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the absence of those and caution against fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauteryzed at the neck, below two bones with two cauteries, immediately producing.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the veins are old and accustomed and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head before, and it is verified that this is superfluous fluid matter, then cauteryze that same spot with a cautery, which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of inflammation in the veins, and cauteryze in the same spot on the head and with two cauteries on the temples, and with two cauteries below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add more, then cauteryze that entire side of the vein on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the Cauterization of Foul Smell of the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate that same spot which we have said in the division and do not hasten your medication, then prepare and give to the patient three nights' sleep; and then shave his head, and cauteryze that same spot with a lesser cautery or an olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauteryze that same spot with a clave cautery or with two cauteries on the two eyebrows below the hair, a small one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery that you do not injure it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the clave cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the Cauterization of Softening of the Eyelids of the Veins.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the vein is softened by illness or humidity, then cauteryze that eyelid with a cautery and this cautery is lunar; and this is its form.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauteryze that above the two eyebrows a small one with two cauteries in all parts, and thus elongate the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And thus is the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Vein when the Skin is Converted to the Internal Parts and Punctures the Vein.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the vein is converted to the internal parts and punctures the vein, cauteryze in that spot according to two manners, because the cautery is either with iron or with medicine combustible.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauteryze with fire, command the patient to lie down on that spot which you have readied the skin, just as if it were those which are in the world, until they are prolonged and enlarged; and if you puncture that spot before its time, then strengthen the veins of the patient with a bandage so that it is not weakened until the skin is nourished.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are nourished and enlarged, then pause the head of the patient in the same place, and place a sign above the eyelid of the veins of the patient with a tent, with a signal which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and it is the beginning of the signal proper of the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then pause with a cotton pad in an album of wool or in a mucilage of ptilli over the vein.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauteryze on the figure which has been signaled, little by little, in soft touches, until the surface of the vein is burned, which is just like the leaf of myrtle, entirely apparent properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the signal of the goodness of the work is that you see the eyelid of the vein already contracted and the skin of it elevated from the puncture of the vein.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then elevate your hand and leave it like that for three days, and then pause on it with cotton cloth bound around it until the scar is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	When the skin returns to its natural color due to some cause and the eyelid is softened, then apply another time the cautery on that entire area as if you had done it for the first time.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize that which has been elevated to its natural place and has been bent and the skin does not touch the vein.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift the skin within so it is prolonged and bent, and then make a chart of fabric in the form of a leaf of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some soap concoction and living water to anoint there. And apply it. Where the water is, and mix those causes well, and apply it to the fasting place so that it does not get cold; and apply it spread over the chart which was made thus in the form of a myrtle leaf, and put it on one vein of both arms; and put below the vein bent into an album of wool, and the head of the patient should be in a straight tie.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And put the finger on the medicine and press it a little and do not touch with the hand so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because the bite is in it as from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus how you will perceive that the other bite, then release the medicine and touch it to the straight finger; thus how the biting stops, then remove the medicine and wash the vein with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted thus as if washed from the constriction of fire or incision, because then it is; and if not return on that of the medicine on the place where you have not impressed the medicine and do not deny until your operation is bent and the vein is constricted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then put on the outer skin to heal into order that the venom of the adjustment is eradicated, and then cure it with an ointment of definite finicon or another into order that it be healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, from your operation that you keep diligent vigilance so that the medicine does not fall on the vein, and if the eyelid for several days is softened and some cause of the skin touches the vein, then repeat your medicine on the place where the eyelid is softened, and properly thus as you did at the beginning, and then send it inside to be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the veins of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and thus according to what was made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it will not be veiled the way of straight direction to that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the vein.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with water that we have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it thus in this manner: command the patient to put their head straight in the tie, and hold the head of some minister between the ties more in such a way that it is neither veiled nor agitated at the tied head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then put outer skin on an album of wool or in a poultice of ptilli over the vein of it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be conical, thus as it is a form of cane or of feather of vulture, from one extremity to the other where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out thus as an awl.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But especially that which is burned is better at the tied work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then take the fistula if it is opened, and draw out its sap and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then put on the cautery which was well ignited, and you have that in a small part of the cautery of the vein at the partition of the nose, so that it does not err with your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then put the cautery in the grooves of the vein and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus at the beginning of the vein cautery, you will see into the bone, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if it is necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then put on outer skin to heal and wrap it in an ointment exsiccated until it be healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if they were passing eleven days and it is not healed, then put on the medicine acute corrosive until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the seventh chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And it is another manner of cautery of fistula which the first doctors discovered: then in the place of the fistula and make a hole there and put on that fissure subtly as it is the form of it: They put in it the quantity of one ounce of lead melted; and you hold your hand well with good retention, and do not veiled the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the vein of it; and then put on the outer skin of the patient's vein enfused in an album of wool or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous sanitation.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed in a way that we have spoken of regarding the cautery and treatment, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to administer traction from the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the nose according to how it will be in its own location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	About the cauterization of the fracture of the toes.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Moth-like ulcers suddenly forming fissures on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures in the way that we have spoken of in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is described:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And it is the conquest of the patient according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then pause that initiated cut carefully into those fissures until the cautery reaches the root of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that wounded area thoroughly until it is healthy.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	About the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess forms and then breaks, and then it is ruptured, and then it is antiquated, and you correct the break and it is made into a fistula, and then you treat that and do not deepen your treatment, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then you place that ignited thing in the traction of the fistula, and you hold it with your hand until it reaches the iron ignited at the root of it, and afterwards you make a scab or two; and then you heal that wounded area in the way that we have spoken of regarding the treatment until it is healthy.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the wound is absolved and healed, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and extract the corrupted bone according to how it will be in its own chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	About the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and not with caution, then pause the head of the patient in the specified position, and ignite the cautery in the form that will be suitable, even so that you place the burnt point on the tooth and insert it into the gum, and hold your hand firmly until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to how you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards stop it, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is stiffened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	About the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness, or if there is cold or worm in it, or if the treatment with medicine does not confer, then cautery is used in two ways: either cautery with a hollow tube, or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a hollow tube is that you take a hollow tube of copper and boil it in hot iron, and then take a cotton thread and wrap it around the extremity of the tube, and then immerse it in the boiling tube, and pause it over the painful tooth firmly until it is cooled down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat it several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge the cotton thread or cloth in the aforementioned tube, and pause it over the painful tooth, and hold it over the ignited iron until the iron reaches the root of the conquered tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, beware of the cauterization with fire that you attend to the quantity of iron or copper, and it is in the core of some gross material and the acuity of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form that will be suitable, and pause it over the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled down; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary to impress on the patient that they should rinse their mouth with good wine and hold it for an hour and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cautery is done in whatever way you wish to do it extremely, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	About the cauterization of crooked toes.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When crooked toes are caused by flux and cold humors and do not obey the direction through medicines and you wish to direct them lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is this: having two hubertas (special tubes) per extremitat, so that the smoke of the cautery goes through the other extremitat, and pause the ignited thing over the abscess once, and another time if it is necessary for that, until it reaches the root of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and apply a dressing for three days and place it on the affected area until it is fully cleansed so that what the fire has consumed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal those who are wounded and bruised, and apply ointments until they are healthy.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or the two cauteries is such that it conveys.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of wounds of the foot and of constrictions of the ankle.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is complicated by coldness of completion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with medicines that are laxatives, and then cauterize those who have the root of the gout in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not touch the cautery to the gout nor burn the coding of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize those who have another cautery at the joint of the neck in the posterior vertebrae of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be shaped like a key according to the preceding method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal those who have what is previously mentioned until they are healthy.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung diseases and of coughs.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughs and lung diseases are caused by cold moistures and the patient has no fever nor thirst and it is an old disease, then cauterize those who have two cauteries on the forked part in the affected areas of the loins and hips; and another cautery in the middle part of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be shaped like a key according to the preceding form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, the form of which precedes in the pointing of pain of the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points until it reaches those; and then heal those who have what is previously mentioned until they are healthy.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauteries have three ramps because the cauterization is like this: you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of numbness that is at the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slippery moistures and does not stay in its place at the time of its return, until it is as it usually returns, and then by a small movement it is displaced thus that it ends, thus as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the dislocation, and then the patient will be reversed over the two hips or over the sides; and then elevate the code which is in the partition of the citillic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the upper parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cauteries that have two heads; and this is their form.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the code until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and thus those subtleties according to the quantity of tension; and this is their form.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some occasions are adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause on the cauteries that are cooked in salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a key-shaped cautery or with many pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and moisture enter the stomach to the point that it extracts its completion and is multiplied in it, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confuse them, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with their arms extended and their legs, and then cauterize those who have three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger's length shaped like a key, and two cauteries below the two sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangular cautery is formed; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so they will not putrefy.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two fingers' lengths of the thickness of the code.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, added thus. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and let it be a cautery according to the circular form according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized pointedly to one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tension, and then cauterize those who have a pointed cautery; and then heal those who have the cure that is previously mentioned until they are healthy.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of a feverish foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the foot hurts from cold or dampness or thick windy humidity that disturbs its normal complete function and is cured by egress of superfluous fluid, and it does not comfort, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and we will apply three cauterizations according to this form and quantity measured over the foot, below the hip joint, where one perceives the decubitus of the same.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery in motion.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the meatus of the specillum of the codena, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and lifted their legs.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible that you can cauterialize these cauteries with a cuticular cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the specillum of the entire codena be absorbed so that the entire body is absorbed and reaches into the intestines, because the codena here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess of the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel grave trouble and sharp pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tendon of the foot, then the pain is greatly acute and often the doctors are weary of its cure.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto their back; and place a sign on the area of the abscess with a probe; and ignite the cauteries which are assembled like a rake, in the form of which I have described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cautelize with that instrument and cautery until the entire codena is burned, until it reaches the deep flesh, until there is no more sanity.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by curing other abscesses until it is healthy.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not fitting that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the most of which many maladies are recognized; however I have experimented with some gentle women who were bold about this operation, but I will leave that to you, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology for ulcers frequently follow this manner of being made, and it is this that you take from the roots of aristology a long dry root which is found, and let it be of the thickness of the finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and heat it at the fire, and then cautelize with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and make two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining to the part that is below the beard, and make two cauteries on what is declining between the fifth rib and the knee, declining slightly to the back parts; and make another cautery in the middle place of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the back parts; and make one cautery at that place which is between the two shoulders, and make two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery, unless it is in the manifest of the codena in operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And thus I have described the ancient cauteries which are similar to those of men who use iron-like cauteries that resemble a ray and ignite it, and place it at that spot which is between the ribs, until they reach to that abscess and healthy sanity is restored, just as I have said in the case of the foot abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because I have often seen it happen that the cautery reaches to the spot of the fistula where there is no health.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the mole.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the malady of the mole with what I have said about the curation in the division and do not confuse your curation, then cautelize on it according to three manners, all of which are straight-forward, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the mole, according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And it should be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little less, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle which we have held in the cautery of the foot in balance.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not grasp your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be elevated on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And it is another way of cauterying, so it is that you should ignite the cautery having two vertices, which causes to have spoken in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and elevate the cord which is at the end of the molar bone where the patient feels the pain on the affected side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And it should be your elevation where you elevate the cord according to the length of the body, so that several cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two vertices, ignite the motor, in that intro where those penetrate the cord of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want, cautery with a cautery having three vertices.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the cautery better than letting it be carried by three years, because it is more comfortable than the other previous causes in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery of hydropic people.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not made on hydropic people, but rather in adjacent places properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydropic person with the methods of cure which we have spoken of in the division and do not contradict your cure, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilical area and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the foot, and one cautery on the molar bone, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the cautery remain open so that it can be carried for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from cure then with the cautery because it is necessary that they be added to their two intentions, and will be fastened to their two assistants for health.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery which is used to cautery the belly should be clave-like according to the shape of that which precedes, and it is that which is used to cautery the back should be olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostematous in hydrops and full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cautery the feet on the back of the foot at night, where it is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the stagnant water resolves.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on both thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery should be made at the extremity of the cautery cutter.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And it should be the cautery according to the length of the thigh: one at the knee and another at the middle place of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And then let the open plague remain uncured for a long time, so that some water resolves from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure them with those causes which we have spoken of.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of belly and intestines.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly and intestines are cold and humid, so that they debilitate the virtues, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with those methods of cure and do not contradict, and sometimes the patient suffers from exhibiting cauteries of virtue, then cautery that with a great cautery on the entire stomach according to what precedes in the cautery of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four cauteries in the subtle circuit of the umbilical area, with a subtle clave-like cautery; and with a cautery on the alcatin on a large aloesis, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humidities exhuberate and the patient is tolerant, then cautery that on the pentenilh and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguina, because it is a perfect cure of juvament which does not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors cold and humidities corrupted, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not contradict their tieua cure, then cautery them with three cauteries on the pus below the small and small triangular vertebrae, and a cautery above the umbilical region for two digits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If it is deemed that the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food is not being digested, and their face is sometimes affected, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cautery; and place one cautery on the thigh, and another on the lower back with a clavicular cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time open, and afterwards take care to heal the inside.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On cauterization of the thigh, afterwards prepare for their abscess to burst.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you abscess the thigh, then ignite the cautery that is assembled into a rod.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Afterwards insert that ignited rod into the abscessed thigh, and ultimately guide it inside until it reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make an incision of one or two fingers, because if the achilles tendon is too thick, then cauterize whichever of them according to what has been recounted, and afterwards take care of those that confer benefit to their joints until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the buttocks, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural dermal layers of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal them with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when you see a fistula in the natural dermal layer, and it is old, corroding the healthy part of it and humidifying corrupting matter, and therefore that which is more worthy to cover is that which proceeds with a subtle probe, and afterwards consider the quantity of the profundity of it before the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Afterwards ignite the cautery that resembles a rod.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And afterwards insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it penetrates the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And hold the cautery on that until they burn those corrupt bodies entirely, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards take care of the place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and the abscessed matter has been removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter has not been removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of a corrupt bone, or something from those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the kidneys.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or excessive windiness, and therefore the hollow of the patient's thigh is affected, then it is necessary that you cauterize that over the kidneys with a cautery on whichever kidney has a clavicular cautery, from which proceeds the remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize them according to the second small indication, so that three linear cauteries will be made, and therefore they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that in the part most above the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of notes on the skin of the buttock; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a clavicular cautery according to what has been described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the matrix (womb).
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and humidity in the matrix (womb), and therefore conception is prohibited, and its menstruations are corrupted, and it is delayed the provocation of them, and it causes pain from the movement of them, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder; and one cautery on the lower part of the back, or two cauteries, and let it be a clavicular cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When humidity often infiltrates the part of the ankle, and is a caused reason for the displacement of that joint, and it is signified by it that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is discovered in the boy's thigh.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cover the patient with a circular cautery around the affected area of their arm, since you have sensed that you have touched it in the circle of the affected area and thus it is revealed, and so that the affected part returns to its proper place within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And it is the cautery which precedes the form in the cautery of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then cautery that arm with three olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and then take care that it be healed from within.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the affected area of the arm, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured by what we have said before, and it does not conflict, and it is ancient, then cover the patient with gross humors using foul pills or artificial semblances; and then cautery that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with combustible medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that it cauteries the arm above the ankle with three triangular-shaped cauteries according to this form; and make them with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And it is the space which is between each cautery, the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some withered places have the cauteries in the proper place on the head of the ankle, because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cautery with the circle in which the form is precised in the cautery of the dislocation of the arm, and that circle contains and burns the inspection of the entire code.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in every case when pain is adherent to the arm and does not extend within to the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended within to the thigh, then cautery that arm with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain turns; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers' width below the affected part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutting, and it is the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient turns where the pain is extended within to the proper place near the toes, then cautery that here where it turns with a cautery of three points or four or more if it is indicated for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient turns where the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then cautery that here with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cautery that you do not ultimately use the cautery in such a way that it burns nerves or large arteries, and that for this reason it is not on the patient's bad nourishment or contradiction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one or another of those who cautery on the hip and ultimately in the cautery, and the burned focus inflamed within so that the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then a strong solution of wine, and then death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two affected areas at the same time, cautery each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And they described the wise men in the cautery of the arm, of which this is the manner: make a semblance to a circle of iron, whose circumference is the width of a palm; and it is seven orifices according to the thickness of a finger's bone or less than a little.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then that circle is another inch; and the space which is between them is the quantity of the notch of the thumb; and those circles are used for two affected areas; and their length is one or two inches, and make an iron margin decently attached to the circles; and this is their form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it is ignited in the fire until it becomes red-hot and sparks, and then it is placed over the affected area of the arm, the patient gathered over the sheet there.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cautery that arm with three red-hot cauteries in one withering.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to the arm with a bandage and leave the ulcerated plague for many days; and then take care of the arm until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, sons, of this species of cauteries few have used for the terror of the regard of it, and for this reason few have found those who regard it above.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But of the good cauteries to him who suffers, and find them in the place of it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cauteries with adhering medicines are that you make two circles having an armored perforation in which they would put the hinge of the iron door; it is the length of the partition in the nakedness of them, there are two inches or those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the spaces between which are among the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and thus opened and underneath, and thus that they contain themselves between their following this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then stop on the affected area of the water that the patient is lying on, and comprehend your hand over the affected area of the water; and then take warm water and put it between two circles, and the quality of that water be at the small fire little by little, and apply it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the moderate and adjustment of it — because that atrocious moderate heat thus from fire — until the moderation ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and withdraw the warm water from all the affected area into watery doublings.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it like that for three days and stop on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remedy remains, and leave it like that for some days, and correct the patient's poultice; this is the last step in the treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that one who is wounded until he is healthy.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make a statue of it containing water according to what is done in the affected joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of warm water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and caustic waters not extinguished by two kinds of ana, one part, and triturate them and stop in a new vessel of which the affected part is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the vein.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And stop there at the bottom of another vessel, and pour over that alkaline and caustic water of sweet water which takes those for one finger, and since you comprehend those with your good compression, and leave the hole that descends from the sharp water in the affected part to another vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another cause of living and other alkaline renovelatz, because at that time it will be very strong and acute, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus among the medicines some are those which are cauterized strongly, thus with teas and honey and good sabur, in this way that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of a man from the ancients the operation and the cure in which he was cured of pain from water and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be free from that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because he is healthy for a long time thus as recommended, because he strongly believes in bathing and exercise, and so he is freed from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that he takes certain green cetraragi, and if it is not fresh green, take recent fig; and much be triturated in a few gray ones and be stopped on the water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and be released.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for three hours' quantity or for the amount that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in bath and then when his body is warmed up, put him in the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healthy.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And I know that it does not cover that some use of cauteries in these medicines except to evacuate the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Moreover, Escorides says that when the vein is constricted by the goat's foot, it is cauterized; and then I will do so to him: take wool and dip it in old oil, and put it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's foot and inflame that in fire until it becomes charcoal; and then stop it over the wool and leave it until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then heat that, and do not cease doing that until the sensation of moderate heat penetrates into the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cautery of goat's foot.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in the Toes.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in the toes are caused by various causes, such as by bruising or percussion or by excessive evacuation, and by similar causes, by infusion of cold and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not done except in this sole species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with small, fitted pills and similar to them, which are made on the toes where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of it, because you have tenths in each line or cauteries, more or less, according to the quantity that one sees of the tolerance of the patient and of its virtue.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And thus is made the cauterization with pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with medial claveal cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the commencement of gout treatment.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Mild remedies are given to these small children; and the sign of the commencement of it in children is that they stumble upon their erect structure and elevate with difficulty and limitation of movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And vertebrae in the back of the spine begin to protrude beyond the others, which have already started to overlie on top of the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that which is around the circle in accordance with this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine in a circular motion.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize on the circuit of the spine with the pointed cautery at two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And then make points properly between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the area within, so that it will be healthy as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that the cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore how to cure gout caused by cold humors in many ways of treatment, and not just relieving the pain, then they remain cured with cauteries.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you should cauterize on the evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this cautery is olive-shaped, of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains penetrate into the teeth or other joints, and there are many remedies to be given, then cauterize that on each tooth with three or four cauteries of the entire affected part with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed, which these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, but only just around the specificity of the code.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate into the tooth and back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands as well, and it is called sciatica, then puncture in the circuit of the veins thus as they revolve, puncture on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture in the circuit of the veins over each notch and over the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains penetrate deeply into the joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected areas of the entire part of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and flaccidity is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the limbs and the intestines are torn apart from the cavity to the genital area, and it is beginning to suppurate, then it is necessary that you order the patient to fast for seven days and use lenient causes so that the fissure of the seventh ventricle may heal.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient between your hands over the seventh vertebrae, and command him to hold the seventh wing inside so that it may be fortified or the cavity or intestines may appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the fingers and sinew, holding the rupture over the bone of the pentagonal shape at the sign of the extremity, which is similar to the circle at the lower divided parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery, of which this is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes very red and has many sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then pause the cautery on that sign with your hand on the cautery, standing straight, and you will see that the bones of the pentagonal shape are conjoined inside the finger of the ring finger; and afterwards, another time, if you have not succeeded in the first treatment, you will try again until it is conjoined.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the time of your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, lest it causes death or another great evil to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	You should know that when you have the cautery in hand, do not touch the bone, as it does not contribute to your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is fitting that the cautery for children should be subtle, according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage, so that the crust of the wound may be removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of those with other wounds until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient sit on a soft pillow for forty days, until the wound is sealed and the plague.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is fitting that you pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time for his cure, which will lighten his stomach and not let the intestine come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then when you want to get up after forty days, then administer the decoction decently made, and hold that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let it be moderated by labor and replenishment of food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of healing, he will be entirely healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will direct the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want that there be no delay, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot cautery according to the quantity of it, and let it be what is expelled from the codena, just as the third part of it; and then take care of him who has what we have said, and it will not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I will show you first that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked on the tent.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And there is a paused line that goes through the width in the lattice above the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand on a clave cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Hernia.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is pain in certain members due to a fall or percussion and it persists for a long time and does not contribute to the cure with medicines, then it is fitting that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be for each member according to its magnitude and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location of hernia and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healthy due to the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat it on him with the cautery; because it is customary for those pains that they are punctured in a member near that member which approaches the one, so that you know how to use those cauteries until the patient is healthy.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The leprous wounds are touched by the cautery for great juvenation, and it is better if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and as it is cured with what we have said in the division and do not delay, neither here nor there, and fear about the patient whose corruption comprehends the entire body of him and all his complexity, then cauterize that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and one at the end of the hair; and two on both horns; and one behind, on the nape or service.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand on the cautery a little inside so that it impresses a small impression on the bone, and from it are dislocated the scorches, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and cauterize on the middle according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is fitting that you cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheek, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on each thigh, and one on each knee, and two on each ankle, and one on each shin, and two on each calf, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the seven feet; and cauterize him on all the joints of the said members and feet, and on each heel of his seven feet, and on the soles of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are above the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the thigh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more they will juvenate and confer; and you should know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just as they have said, so that the body of him is already stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It seems that the text describes a medical procedure or treatment for a patient. Here is my attempt to translate the first sentence:
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the cautery in the farina of the burnt area with honey and with another cure within, so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On Cauterization for Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and it is not healed, then you cautetrize that numb member with cauterizations according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate into the narrowness of the channel in a little while.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that which is inflamed within, so that it may be healthy.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some wounded areas are cauterialized for certain numbness which goes to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back and vessels of the nerves which govern that member, and the numbness is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	There is no pressure on it except that which is known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On Cauterization of Ulcers that are Morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not respond to the remedies of medicine, then you cautetrize on that which is overgrown with a pointed cautery in a little while according to the quantity of the specific nature of the channel within, so that the whiteness and color of it may be restored, and its color may be changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that which is farina of errors and of lentils with rose oil and with leaves of dragonwort, and with the blood of pigeon or with the blood of yronda, from each one a part and all are mixed together, and then let it be anointed with a cloth and placed over the area until it may be healthy.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On Cauterization of Cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cautetrize that with a circular cautery in the circuit of it, thus as it is turned around.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And I will teach you that it should be cauterrated with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it has not been seen, because I think that it is ulcerated, and already I have seen some wounded areas.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cautetrize in the circuit of it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On Cauterization of Abundant Humors.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abundant humors are delayed in maturation, and thus they are due to the superfluous nature making that, or because of the bad state of the patient, which is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of abundant humors; then cautetrize in the circuit of it with many small pointed cauteries; and then let it be, for it will fasten into maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and place that in the middle place of abundant humors until it penetrates the channel.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cautetrize in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal that until it may be healthy.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is corrupting ambulation in the member, which corrodes that thus as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if you want to burn that corrosion in the place where it suffers from cautery with fire, then you ignite clave-shaped cauteries, many small ones, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where there is corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cautetrize that from all parts until you eradicate all the corrosion and none of its causes remain.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it be for three days, and place over the cauterialized places a triple layer of mixed oil until all scars are totally eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then heal that which is inflamed flesh generating flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which remains rotten in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated with some old medicines with acute medicine, because that is a middle ground in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But Emperor Cautery with fire is of more use for youthful rejuvenation.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure of it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that which is of its auras' endurance.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Wounds and of Other Similar Things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many wounded areas go to the lower parts of the foot afflicted with what is called a wound, and it is a gross, inward cause, which wounds the foot; and cauteries are used in those according to two manners, thus it is cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	More cauterization should be done with a red-hot iron, which seems to penetrate deeply, according to the quantity of humor that each part of the body contains, and it should be done with subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then stop the fire on the nail, and return your hand to the cautery in the circle of the nail until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it stand for three days until you start to feel better.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with malva and salvage roots in salt, and let the plaster stay on it for a night, because it will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place affected by generating new flesh until it is healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and morbid matters accumulate on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer those cauteries with water, and it is necessary to take a cannula of iron or fire or red-hot iron, and place it on the nail; and put the cannula in hot water for a short time, and remove your hand, and return it to compression with your whole hand, and it should be pressed on the margin of the cannula into the root of the nail, and obstruct the flow of hot water via the hole of the root of the nail; and wait for the patient a little while, until the biting sensation of the hot water passes for an hour, and then remove it, because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do to those things and then add another until you overcome all the humors that are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those pustules since the roots of the nails are eradicated, and the flesh will regenerate on its own without any infection.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 3.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On Cauterization of Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When it happens that a tremor occurs due to cold in the nerves or due to fever caused by cold, or for another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cauterialize with four cauteries or five above the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and apply a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, a cautery of olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of it is restored and strengthened by the health of the patient's cold constitution.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 4.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On Cauterization of Accidental Wounds to the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are accidental wounds, and pus-filled abscesses which are caused by corrupt gross matter; therefore it is necessary to begin with appearance, that it should be cauterized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, whose extremity is extended with fire; or with a root of long aristology; or with a slow-burning cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And the scabs that are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they do not grow, and the superfluous flesh is dispersed, making them healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	More importantly, it is necessary that this be done with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On Cauterization of Flowing Blood due to Incision of Arteries.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times flowing blood from arteries that are incised by the wound which has become putrid, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and thus it seems difficult to stop it.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when it happens to reach that point, then you should hold with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop there until it is strengthened enough to stop the flow of blood from the wound, and so that it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then stop at the focus of the cauteries with olive oil and grapes, by name of many, and blow on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them a small or large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly holding it so that you may return the flow of blood, and you cautelize until it is bound and restored, that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you return the flow and extract the cauteries, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries that are prepared in the focus, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is restored.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not harm the nerves that are here, and that another evil does not come over the patient's other evils.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when the artery flows with blood, then it is not possible to restore the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four methods: either cautery as I have said, or extraction when it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of my veins are harmed and the blood is restored, or that it be tied with a faithful bandage or with a strong structure, or that they are stopped with medicines which have the virtue of restraining the blood; and they are strengthened in the pulvinar with decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Those who administer treatment should decently restrain themselves from lamenting and straining, and not overstep their position, lest they worsen the causes of combustion and similarity, not comforting unless it's bitter.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if one endeavors to heal and is not a present doctor, then work on the indicated pause of the said orifice with that vein, as we have said, and intend to the great constriction within so the blood is stopped from the superior part of the plague, and above the artery it is not rebuffed; and above the artery is aspirated with much cold water of great coldness within so the blood is congealed and thickened; and perhaps it is necessary to cauterize or medicate.
Comensa la segonda partida.	It begins the second treatment.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and ventosas and of phlebotomy and of sores and their similars.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the teachings of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have said in the first chapter all about malady in which cautery is convenient and medicine combustion, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauteries; and I will order the chapters of the inferior part of the head until the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter by that method, so that it may be of use to whoever needs it, then on what will be demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And therefore I begin here, certainly, sons, that you learn that in this chapter it is to terrify what is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that which is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuations are made, such as evacuation of blood with aspiration of the vein or incision on the apostema or perception of exstirpation or purification of the plague or extraction of sageta or incision of stone and their similars.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the end of their cats death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is in the situation, because some evacuations happen due to your mannerisms of men with mannerisms of many maladies.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is said that they flee from their malady and escape death, and thus for the vehemence of what they find in their malady, and for the length of their malady, and in the malady is fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those it is given to you to have and to say, you waiting in that sanity, and the following malady is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you do not consent to that which is seen by you of this manner; and your caution should be greater than confidence and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause over what is certain science that verifies it in you, and to which you perceive successful praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And you are established in the cure of all your maladies with prognosis and indication of it which is converted health, because in that you have help above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires your understanding and does not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinctly by chapters according to what proceeds in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that it may be of use to you whatever you demand of it and whatever you need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the cure of water that is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this malady many times occurs in infants from birth and when the nursery is strengthened, the head of the infant is freed from lividity.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some evacuations occur due to a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this malady except in infants; and all those whom I have seen are caught by death, and thus it is to me a lamentable work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that an infant whose head was full of water, and the head of it was always magnified until it ceased to be able to support itself because of the greatness of its head, and perhaps the humidity increased until it died from heat.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the codena and the bone, or is added below the bone on the siphac.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation on it if the humidity is between the codena and the bone and the apostema is small, then you find in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two nodes until the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the apostema is greater, then there are two fissures here according to this manner.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, it is signified that you see the commissures of the head opened from all parts and the water is sprinkled when you comprehend this in the tie and at the internal parts and it is not what you hide.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Look for three fissures in the brain according to this method.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the humidity; and then strengthen the fissures with draps and plums; and then apply something on top for six days, and then relieve the ligament and cure the plague in ten tries and bandages, and strengthen the head with equality; eat the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which considers how to bring out the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated areas are more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the flow of water is released, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid flowing blood and death of the patient by that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	The incision of the arteries which are close to the kidneys, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter third.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When you find some catarrh or rheum in the veins or at the feet, and it is antiquated there, and it does not confer on that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision in those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then look when you want to incise those that the patient's blood flows to their head, and make a rough drap on the surface with a pointed instrument so that the arteries appear, and make the neck of the patient strong with some drap; and consider the pulse of the vein; and the places above the places which are close to the kidneys are removed, and they are hidden until some hours.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then sew above the artery with a thread, and incise some part of some affected area near the incision penetrating into the bone, and it is done for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, remove the spatium below the artery and cut it to equalize the incisions at the upper parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And it is the length of the incision that measures two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised the blood is released in a pulsating outflow, which is felt before for its frequent beats.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then look for the measurement of the kidney's quantity of three digit spaces, and sew above with a thread, and do it until it reaches the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that is how to stop the flow of blood which is a quantity of six ounces. and far from getting more of it, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the strength of the patient and the replenishment of their artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the plague, and if there remains some cause of the disease on the bone, then incise it so that no abscess is left behind.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the plague with plums and ligaments of drap, and then cure it with bandages until it is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When some ancient or chronic catarrh or sharpness has migrated to the temples, due to humidity and quality in the lacrimal glands of the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing to those, and it is medicated with medical cures and that does not confer, then we have progressed into these maladies extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those eyes as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient's blood flows to the skin which is in the temples; and attend to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the pulse, and it is hidden until a few hours due to the vehemence of the drap.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some drap; and make a rough drap on the surface with a pointed instrument or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the spatium of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then score the cord in that which is facilitated until you reach the artery; and take out the vein and extract it from the upper parts until you extract it from the cord and discover it from the tunics which are below it, of the entire part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it at the extremity of the vein, and incise it in one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not pour out entirely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate six ounces of blood. until three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the acidity is great, then it is necessary to bind that in two places with strong double ropes or cords at length, and not to touch the putrid matter during the consolidation of the wound and stopping the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then cut away the excess flesh which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inserted into the bone, cutting into it so that the extremities of it are burned, and remain in place of that bad mixture.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work because the patient has fever or is of complicated composition; for cautery is one of those causes that helps to eliminate the finishing humidity, and therefore it is better in judgement.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to extract the acidity that fills the place of ancient wound, and then pause on the decently made poultice, and then be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh and bones whole again so that it may be healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if meanwhile you are working on another occasion to stop the flow of blood from the acidity, then you touch it to restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or fill the place of the wound, and strengthen your hand within so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the finger on the place until the blood is congealed, and moisten the place with water of vehement coldness so that the acidity rests, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And it is better to extract the acidity by cauterying the vein with this cautery having two ends, since you have touched the two places tentatively, and paused sometimes, not moving much, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it may be elongated, because they are not consolidated entirely by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the acidity of the two ends together.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But emperor, if you mix the acidity of two ends together it is better, because if you sharpen them with two proper ends towards each wound, and do not burn the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some grossness in those, it has held the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is separated more lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And it is the space which is between two ends, the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the cure of bodies of sharp and acidic humors of the wells.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the humors are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the bed before, and do not find in that any cause of medical cure, and sometimes the face of the patient already becomes red, and feels on the dry front of walking thus as if it were a walking of ants, and the wells of that are exhausted, humidifying thus that the skin of their son is constricted, and the eyelids are scabbed by the acidity of the tears, the ancient masters most agree in the cure of those of this operation, and no one names that cure with spat.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to walk on the skin which is on the dry front, and then make three grooves at a distance equal to the length of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the groove falls into two digits: one groove is equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third of the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the acidity which is in two sides, and elongate your hand from the continuity of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each beginning is adjusted to the quantity of three digits.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of spongy material prepared or dry cloths that are moved towards the ones that dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula between two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the partition of the temples until the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract all that code which is between two incisions on the siphac which is above the bone, and then do it from the middle incision towards the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then straighten this spatula and insert it into the first incision, or use another instrument called a cutter, sharpened on one side and not on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the side of that sharpened part towards the adjacent flesh of the code, and the side of it beneath the bone, and employ it until it reaches the middle groove, and separate all those veins that descend from the head to the wells.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But it is continued to the incision up to that part of the code, and then do it in the middle groove until the other groove.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Because blood flow is obstructed in quantity, express the congested areas of the blood vessels of the obstructed blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And stop in any deep wound of the outer layer of the skin, and stop above those swollen veins that are inflamed and oily, and beware that you do not cause an abscess with a hot cautery.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a great abundance of warm water or decoction, and then cure with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients that the wounds may be healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	About the cure of ulcers caused by catarrh and also about the descending humors from the divided parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When one has catarrh coming from above and it continues, and sometimes the humors of the patient are exhausted and small, and already their strength is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and because of that the skin is rough, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent inflammation, then you will know by this accident that the materials and catarrh do not come except from many veins of the divided parts above.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: that you order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in a vein on the middle of the forehead, a small one for the latitude (and begin with the incision of the left temple towards the right temple; and insert it into the bone; and stretch out your hand from the lacrimal ducts of the temples which are affected by the mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the blood that is in the sponge or absorbent cloth and then replace it between the two lips of the wound with outer skin or absorbent cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And stretch below swollen veins that are inflamed and oily, so that you do not cause an abscess with a hot cautery.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has diminished, then you should scrape the bone until it begins to form new flesh, and then cure with a regiment of desiccative ointment which makes the flesh grow, thus as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an emplastre and apply it to these wounds on the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	About the cure of those that fall into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral pebbles or a cause similar to pebbles, thus as iron and veins, or it is from a plant thus as cress or fava, or it is a fluxing cause thus as water and oily things and their similarities, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when pebbles fall into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if times the pebbles, then distill in some oily violet or sapphire, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the stomach condense, and open the nostrils to receive the event of evacuation.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then stop in the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gotten out, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called a subtle gestatory epicicary, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten in the gestation, well; and if not, then administer extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a canal of iron and insert the extremity of the canal into the trunk of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oily things mollified so that nothing passes except the canal.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it with the strong ventilation attraction, because many evacuated matters are gathered with water that we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alumina powder or powdered vinegar apparatus which are pressed into the little quantity of wings, and stop that at the extremity of the radius, and then envelop it decently over the outer layer.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the trunk of the ear facilitated, and then extract the ear from humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And then if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recounted, then you will touch such a thing that an abscess or spasm will be caused.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of touching that thing is that you at the beginning sensibly open the vein of the patient and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make a circle between your hands and convert the ear to the upper parts, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear where the gravity of it is first perceived.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And it is the fissure of lunar figure until it reaches the pebble, and, the pebble extracted, or removed that if you can with an appropriate instrument; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure it until it is healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the case is an abundance of fat that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obtain obedience from your patient, then take subtle steps in this manner:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that person the removal of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not hesitate when you think that it has been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in many small pieces, and try to extract those with the fingers or gestures, or with a subtle insertion, as it is said to have alleviated the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered the ear, it is necessary to use a sternutatory condition at the beginning, and fill the entire ear with much warm liquid, and pour it over the ear where the water is, and if it is forgotten, well; and otherwise, then take three or four lukewarm towels according to the length of the finger, and place them in the fire for a short time, and the patient will insert one of those into the hole of their ear and press on one side of that partition and percuss with another pincer on the pincer that is touching the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So, do not cease to pour water into the ear until all the water has been forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water is forgotten, then you will take pieces of paper or cotton. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the fire until it is burned by the heat of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another cotton and make so many turns until all the water is forgotten, and draw it out with a cannula as it is said to be the extraordinary pincer.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then push and extract it thus, as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes pain at the time of movement, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and fingers, and the cause of it is purer than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of generated worms from the ear, when you cure it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle fingers, but if no cause appears, then take a straight and widened cannula, and that is the form of it.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then suck it out with strong suction, and make many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obtain obedience from your patient, then operate and close in the circle of the cannula as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experimented on by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is your effusion which you pour out the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or copper, straight, in which there is a small hole, and flat underneath.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it is how they fill up what is lacking in the cavity of the cannula, which will be necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap it decently in the extremity of the cannula, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want to put into the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with warmth underneath and express your hand on that compression tempered until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what has been poured into the ear will have been warmed by fire for a short time.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too cold, because ear medicines do not bear it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure of Opilation of Ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some turns of certain infants are born with ears that are not perforated, and this happens in some homes, opilation in the middle of the ear due to a plague or carnation in it; and this opilation occurs in the prison of the ear canal which does not allow movement, and some turns are in the fore-part.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in its prison, which does not allow movement, is among the major dispositions of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which follows movement, it is necessary that you expose the ear of the patient to sunlight and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if sometimes an apparent swelling occurs, it is above that subtle space of which this is the shape of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it is in which there is small latitude, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the space is of two lateral lines so that it does not touch the auricle.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And then if the swelling is from born flesh in the auricle or in its meat, then that has subtle and inclined violent facilities to enter so that all the flesh is stopped.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the curve of the auricle, then take subtle lateral lines and scrape off that focus on a few points, and then place them in the meat of the auricle.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And then if you feel a swelling in that which the patient is bothered by, facilitated by the gravity of ascending, it forces the oppression of it facilitated; and beware that it does not harm the nerves of the auricle.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a dressing on the auricle according to the quantity of the wide part of the bandage which you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a bowl, pulverize it over the already trussed and used bandage; and if the auricle has already been apostemed, then cover so that you extract the water and permute it with another water which you will envelop in wax, so that it is made with roasting oil, until it is the apostemated cautery; and then heal it until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Maybe you will stop the flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the auricle, and use another cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the cure of athetosis which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athetosis which occurs in the eyelids of the eyes sometimes has humid, sometimes dry symptoms.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then it is necessary that you hold those with tenacious or incised fingers, and examine those which are the space of their roots, and then place a dressing on the already trussed areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Maybe you have pain with flow of blood coming, then you should cauterize those with a subtle lancet-like cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to remove the incisions and dry ulcers that return when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure of granulations that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Humid matter accumulates in the eyelids of the eyes for some cause which is assembled into granulations in its strength and hardness, and thus granulation is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of coarse humidity in the lower eyelid and underneath.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation in them is that you consider then if the granulation is proceeding from it in what appears on the eyelid and is mauled to the whole part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make a fissure above it for the latitude, and then scrape off that whole part facilitated until it evacuates, and then suspend it with an incised finger and abscess it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Maybe you have not prepared the incision of it if you do not push to penetrate the eyelid with an incised little by little, then that is not noticed in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that which the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the granulation is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the superficial deepness, then evacuate the eyelid and suspend the granulation with an incised finger, otherwise you will indicate the incision, and press on that whole part, and if the eyelid by incision is prolonged, that is not noticed in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then make an incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure the area with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the cure of axirnah in the lower eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axirnah is a grey thing which is engendered in the tunics of the lower eyelid, and it increases especially in children, aggravates the eyes of those who have it, and accelerates their catarrh; and they cannot regard the clarity of the sun's light because of that which gathers and coytans to them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And thus you often find them complaining about their eyes for a long time, and about their eyes sleeping; and so in the lower eyelids of theirs, the humid eyebrows, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of apparent acceleration is in the eye; and when you press on the area with your fingers, you feel acceleration until it reaches them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	For some manipulation of operation is in that patient whose thighs pause the sick head on the tie, and then pause to drap of them and of their calve, and make a circle according to the quantity that it contains of total partition, and then pause that over that and press am the ties of total per that be aggregated arc in the middle of the circle, and then put an end in the middle of that humidity incident in the fissure for the latitude, and the fissure not be major than the fissure made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Maybe in the preceding hollow that you find the entire code within which you penetrate to reach the arc, because in the major deposits processes the arc by fissure according to the form of white greyishness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that which you have wrapped between the ties of total parts before and revolve between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that the spatula does not penetrate to the vein and descends to that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	Maybe if your arc does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, maybe you adjust in the fissure a small facility until you process the arc; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge draps of them in water and see and agree and place them over the area and strengthen those with poultices.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus you will draw salt water and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if you find a post-apostemic ulcer, then cure that with applied placental poultices until it is healthy.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods of touching the vein.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the veins there are natural and ancient adjustments, then those that bother the vein and cause maladies such as assiduous tears and mollification of the eyelids and skin until it is a cause of destruction of the vein called touching of the vein, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with a focus; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery; or by making incisions and sutures; or with canes as you will be directed.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then cover that you pause the head of the patient in the tie; then convert the eyelid of the vein with your left hand, and if it is converted, good; and if not, insert a needle in that where there is faith in the partition beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with faith from above, and it will be — near the edge of the eyelid where the veins are — near the veins, and pull the faith to the upper parts above the eyelid, and convert that into the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then put an end in the partition beneath the eyelid beneath the adjusted veins with a spatula incident of the larger lacrimal into the smaller lacrimal; and then extract the faith and place it beneath the eyelid with small poultices of cotton or cloth, and then sew over the eyelid with a tender touch, and it will be thus like a figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Maybe emperor, it is the figure according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because it has already been diversified in men, because of those that indicate that a great quantity should be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then put an end with the spatula over the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal into the smaller lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near the natural veins thus like the great vein of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onus in one of the two angles of the code, and then excoriate that entire thing, and then adjust with a subtle lanolin or wool on the two labial lips, and purge the blood, and make it adhere to what is superfluous from the veins onto two supernumerary eyebrows for certain visionary causes, if you wish to do so, and if not, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the suture of the veins for three days or four, and then cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the plague with its suture, and cure that in what dries and constrains, because the eyelid is elevated from the sealing of the plague and its aggregation; maybe the suture is better. Therefore, I thus dismiss the ancient taxes.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Maybe emperor, it is solicited about the patient, and it is of good operation, and it is not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it is another method in phlebotomy, and it is that you mark on the eyelid figure thus like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and conjoined inches according to this form.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Maybe if it is not possible to have the inches, and it is not enguiled, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other vein near the larger lacrimal, and the vein according to the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between the total veins with equality, and then elevate your hand in elevation enguiled, elevate all the code above which has been marked thus as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And you adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and cure that which is within so it may be healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	Perhaps you have caused an abscess to form on your incision or your fissure, but that abscess is hardened and similar to the ulcer, and it has become swollen.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some weakened eyelids that are converted into those like scales, therefore you should use them in that of water which we have spoken of as an incision; perhaps suture in some cases is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat it with canes according to this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and dissect the figure which is hidden according to what has been recounted; and then you use two canes or two subtle steel instruments, of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the latitude of theirs is less than the latitude of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have made an incision in the extremities of some divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some subtlety under the part that superfluously flows from the eyelid of the wheel, and construct the canes of some divided parts in a strong structure, and thus it will be for some years, because the cord for the morbid structure will be denied and will be hidden until it is seen to fall apart.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps it is delayed, then cut the skin with the scalpels, and then cure the wound until it is healthy.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the scales do not puncture.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method of using two canes which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there is the quantity of the length and of the latitude, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of piercing scales on the wheel when the scale is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the scales are unnatural, hard and rough and piercing the wheels, then the operation on them is that you take a subtle awl and pauses in that subtle file of cedar and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move in some manner subtly.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And it is the length of the files of a quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another subtle file below it briefly, and anoint the extremities of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then stop the patient's bad humor in the tender seat, and it is proper of the sun for which your work may be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted scale which has needed to be engendered, and make it penetrate firmly into the eyelid until you extract that from beneath the natural scale.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the scale out from underneath and introduce it into the alloy, and thus the scales will be one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand on that until the scale is forged into the alloy in the eyelid with the natural scale.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Perhaps it is alloyed and the scale is not yet set, you will alloy the parts below with the file which you have composed in that, until it is alloyed above the transparent straw.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you will see the wheel in its vision, because then you will set the alloy and the file, and you will grasp some and close the wheel, and leave the key for two days or three, until the scale adheres to its own place and is born on that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the scale is more brief, then you adjust a long scale of natural scales, and it is elevated in that, or that which remains until it is lengthened to another space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the cure of evacuating what you see in the eyelid beneath.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you evacuate in the wheel, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its own, either on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wounds or sections or cauteries, and it is called leprosy, and this evacuation is natural or accidental, and it is made for consolidation of wounds or sections or cauteries, or for similarity to their bad curings.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	There the manner of operation on it is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips from it, and pause in it until it is between those a kind of layer of linen cloth, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And you do not know that you use the cure of it from the causes which are exhausted, constraining; because if you make that return to evacuation, worse than nothing, you will not have had anything for some time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which mollify thus as it is fenugreek, and imbue with water in which there are coytz altea and sensation of linen cloth, or enguent diyaquilon, which is liquefied in some of the oils, and submerge in that layer, and cure in that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The essence of your treatment is that you thoroughly penetrate all parts so it doesn't consolidate according to the form you focus on at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And in this operation, which we have described, it is not but a certain rectification of the humors that do not return the shape of the place according to the focus then.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of hernia that is made in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hernia that is made in the eyelid below, which is naturally called hernia; and it is of two kinds, natural and accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is caused by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operating on it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and you place it in the flesh, and you make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates into both extreme ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the parts above with the needle and pull it towards the needle, and insert it into the spatula widely.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then the shape of the eyelid returns according to its natural form; if not, take the thread and pause it in the divided figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make two fissures on the edge of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the extreme ends of the two fissures form two angles of the incision, which have been made so that they converge, and it is from their being made in an angle that when they come together they form the shape of theirs.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh according to the quantity that is the edge of the lower eyelid, so that the eyelid is freed.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then take care of them with the softening medications and poultices until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the hernia is opened by a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure over the skin of the eyelid according to what has been prescribed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary of the sermon on the treatment of hernia when it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to the form of hernia it is prepared, and this is in various forms of diverse protrusions.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare everything in such a way that it is possible to return the shape to its natural form, or near to it, and that patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many people in this way, so that the eyelid is solidly attached above on the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it, or stretch it with the nail.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you make the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp enough to make incisions, having obtained a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remain with the spatula that does not touch the eye in its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And this is your incision that excavates that adhesion with facility until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put salt water in the eye, which you wash with; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of milk, and place on the eye a piece of linen infused with album of egg, and then use three days of consolidated causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the nail and prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the nail is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and resembles a subtle cicatrix; or it is non-nervous, resembling a whitish humidity congealed, which when you touch it, or it is forced to take on the nail, it is abscessed and the nail does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin except from the larger tear duct until it goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way of operating in the incision of it is that the patient places his head in a tie, and then operates on the eyes, and elevates the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail from the little duplication and stretches it to the separated parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into a horse's hair or ox's or cow's, or similar, or strong wire, or duplicate the extremity of the small needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and tie it with wire; and stretch it to the separated parts above, and excavate around the skin at the edge of the nail which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will follow that medicine into the patient's belly through the rear of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And you will insert the rhubarb into the radix of the tear duct with subtle spatula or small forceps, and lift the flesh of the tear duct naturally, so that by inserting it, no continued fluxes of tears occur.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail of the sole is extended or has a fissure, thus we have said, and then it should be excavated with a lion's spatula, from which this is the form of it.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that you do not touch the corneal tunics with the spatula and that it does not break into it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then insert a small amount of thrice-blessed salt or seventh-day fire into the wound, and let it stay there for another day; and then take care that the water that covers it will be sanctified.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, or it is fixed in that sole, then many times this type of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as you have recounted in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to insert it, then open the wound of the patient and take a subtle lion's spatula of sharp-edged fretum according to this form.
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rarified and congealed and enters into the radix, then distill from your work in the wound of seventh-day fire or with seventh-day rog or thrice-blessed salt, and open the wound until another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over that operation until it is completely remade, so that there is nothing left of it, unless the contrary, a postema caution should be in the wound, because then you will leave it, and take care at the beginning to remove the postema until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate your operation on that reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the tear flesh, if you notice in the wound for great nuisance, should be suspended with an onion; and insert that from that one part, and do not exceed the insertion so that no continued fluxes of tears occur.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill into the tear duct seventh-day rog and fire of seventh day until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the insertion of aluminum and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some wounds on the skin of some people are born from red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forces them to compress the eyelids towards the divided parts beforehand, and it is assembled like a rose of balconet.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	More, the operation in it is that the patient holds his head on the tieu seat; and then open the wounds of that and collect all that flesh with convenient onions, and you have a forceps or a chest; and then insert the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wound that does not loosen those who deviate from your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And it is your insertion in which you insert those or with the spatula that we have recounted in the insertion of the nail, or small forceps with which it is collected ascetically according to what will be the form of it, as we will find in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When your insertion is completed and all that flesh is remade, then fill the wound with thrice-blessed salt, or distill into the red powder and apply it to the wounds of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound beforehand a covering of albumen until it is assured against postema caution.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if some cause of aluminum and it is lordagged with holy caution, and fears postema caution, then leave the wound and take care of that postema in what will remove that postema, and then iterate over that operation until it is healed, and similarly make a just-adjusted flesh which accedes to the wound of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Moreover, I command you to cover that entire cure of the wound by natural way or by accidental way, open with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is sufficiently suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of sabur in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sabur comes from red wounds which are tested over the wound and prohibit the vessels' operation, and they develop the wound in longitude of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Then it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is sabur is strong and in it there is no other malady than sabur, then you collect that sabur.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to hold his head on the tieu seat, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle double application according to this form.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onions gradually in a vase according to this form.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And you should gather those veins in subtle foresight, with subtlety, and evacuate the blood at that hour, until those veins are relieved of their fluid and you revive them.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not lead the fluid into the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is during midday under the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that nothing flows except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then distill the fluid into a clear green or red oil so that the corroding acidity is removed from the sabelline.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect it all at that hour, then apply a poultice to the area that gives him pain, and leave it on for several days until the pain is calmed and assuredly free of apostemic caution.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over him according to the manner of the Mateyssa, until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the medications:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of inflammation in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat inflammation with a cautery or acute medication, according to what is narrated about him and he is not healed, then it is not engendered in him unless you focus on the aposteme that shows the maturity of him, and that you extract all the humidity which is in him until the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is discovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, then you scrape him with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named an aspere cap, and it is made of iron indeed, and the cap is rounded thus as to reach the which is made pointed for puncturing with lime or alkali for subtle puncturing (thus as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And stop that on the corrupted bone area, and then revolve it between the fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is reduced.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then some evacuations are made, and then restore the area with causes of desiccative and styptic remedies.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the area is consolidated and it is in good flesh and is separated from the body of the wound and remains for 40 days, and it does not deteriorate and does not become apostemated and does not fall into an accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, then it is not in the engendering unless to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you discover with iron or acute medication, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three tribes according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	It is the extraction of the iron in triangular shape, and the staff of it is first extended until the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then stop that on the bone, and it is that of the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little with the fluid, and then revolve your hand with the tribe until it penetrates all the bone, and he feels the pain for as long as it takes to arrive at the bottom, so that you can feel with your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with styptic medicines that desiccate thus as I have described it to you.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and the area are indurated, then the matter which was poured into the affected parts before returns to the nose, so that is why it is easier to cure the pain.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the fluid.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the fluid eminates in its totality and does not fall into vexing numbness or diminution, then it is necessary to leave the pain, and then follow, and stop making ventoses on the cervical scars with good scarification; and stop putting on the fluid a liniment made of acatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and put a strengthening plaster on the fluid with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take draps of the lions' powder, and each drap is duplicated into four pieces; and make them from those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then stop those one upon the other according to the quantity of which the fluid has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with a hard, strict structure; and iterate the ventoses with good scarification; and then remove the ventoses and leave the fluid strained day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meanwhile the ligament is mollified, then it is necessary that it be very strained.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament day and night thus as I have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the fluid has already been reduced, well, and otherwise, then iterate the plaster with powders and structure and ventoses until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the tunicate uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you make a disruption in the tunicate uvea, and then it is prominent and proceeds outward through the eyelids thus as a grain of rasim, and its form is rounded for that, and you want to incise, then the operation on it is thus as I have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea of the lower part below the upper part, and then put another needle in the double filament of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the place of the double filament and lift it with that part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen it thus.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the bitter substance and pause over the wounded area, where an abundance of humors has flowed into the urine and it seems that the thread is in the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with water that comforts within, so that the plague may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some vegetables are added to the entire affected area around the circle of cloth within the wound, and then it is perforated with a subtle spatula that comes from the surface of the wound, and corrects the albugean humidity, and descends into the wound and enters thus.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen within so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called ulcer does not exist, but is only an abscess that is adjusted in the wound resembling descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The manner of operating on it is that you make the ulcer sit over the prepared seat and straighten, and then take the dry cloth in both hands more than two parts and mauve within so that you see the health coming to the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and stays in the light, and the ulcer sees the causes thus as it was.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent to health in water, which we have said, is not prepared, then make the ulcer sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and do so over the surrounding panniculus, circling a little of the continuity of the conjunctiva in the corneal crown (in the place you see), so that the health may be forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is forgotten, then you distill in the wound water that has been heated in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is treated for the other causes within so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending water from the wound.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have said the species of water in the division and what is convenient to perforate with a declarative sermon, then according to the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is necessary that you make the ulcer sit between your hands over a hot stone and bind the dry wound with a very tight knot.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then pause near the eyelid of your dry wound with your left hand, if the wound is on the left; or with your right hand, if the wound is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the medicine, if the wound is on the left; or with your left hand, if the wound is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then pause the extremity of the medicine near the crown for the greatness of the vein in the album of the wound on the part of the lacrimal gland, and then pour the medicine into a glass and rotate your hand in it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the album of the wound and feel that the medicine has already arrived at the cause, which is seen.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that it be the measure of the path of the medicine to the surface of the space which is from the pupil into the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the wound through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then pause the medicine within the place where the water is, and then you will lower it below once again, and thus if the water descends thus, then you will see the ulcer that is above where the patient's sight is thus, and the medicine in the dry wound.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you will pause again before the medicine is touched.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the medicine with ease, and rotate it a little with your hand, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemma and in that lava the wound is purified; and then pause outside the wound, or stop, or anoint with oil rosated and album of urine and ligature on that wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those who are of our time pause over that as written in the album of urine.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your medicine within the instrument of the wound for its duration — because it is a duty of the men whose wound is very hard —, then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called albared from which this is the form:.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then perforate at that conjunction, and do not exceed your hand in the trajectory, and it is not so that you make a way to the medicine in a subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the medicine according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And give the complement of your work, be prepared for the ulcer to descend slowly into the wound where it sleeps on the dry back in a dark and tenebrous place, and be prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature may be aligned, and do not move the dry head to the right or left part of all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	It should be treated according to its disposition until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove it from that dark and troubled place, and examine the free view, and see if there are some causes, and then return the treatment until the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover that opening at the time of the treatments or almost immediately afterwards, the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Keep covered that you close it quickly so that the water does not leak out strongly and vehemently with great regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then uncover it before the seventh day, and correct that which was giving rise to the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you will absolve the view of it and pause over the face of its orifice, by which the evacuation of its contents may be regulated for some days, existing in that dark and troubled place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it will be extracted from that dark place gradually and turned into its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in this case it is not excused to dismiss the disciple from seeing certain visions, and then you will be bold about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now it has come to us from some of those who are at the Artach, and they say that they made a focus in the pierced Ayrac magazine, which is succeeded by the water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen anything like this in our land which has perfected it, nor is it written in the books of the ancient authors; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of pierced magazine, which are above those that ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of iron or of sharp metal, and they are the extremities of their own with this subtle triangular shape, the acute extremity thus as it is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths adjusted to those which are some cause which is assembled like a scorpion of many feet, or a many-footed polyp; and this malady is called polyp because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of it is that it is not lion's flesh of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover the malady with a separator between your hands and place it in the sun, and open the nostrils of it, and pierce the tendon once in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the previous parts, and then inscribe that which you have comprehended of those I have spat out subtly from one part into another so that you know that all the flesh is restored; because if there remains any cause of which the abscess is possible, then you will return to it with one of the subtle instruments facilitated in order that none of the causes remain.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is a holy sign or an abscess, then you pause at what covers; or it is of the malignant apostemas, then you touch and cauterize that until it is absolved holy and all the cavities are restored.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then it will be cut in the nose, then the incision will agree with water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and of the processes humidity enters into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate according to what covers, then you know that it is flesh in the purulent matter of the nostrils which have not been abscessed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore then cover that you put in the faithful one of the quale is some grossness, and anoint with many nuts, and pause between each nut the quantity of the said or month, and engender the malady and put in one extremity of the faithful one in the nostrils with the ray or with another cause which is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then it will be made, that it attracts the sweet odorament into the canals of the nostrils, and it is placed on the sweet galley, because many visions resemble this action, making the children go to school, and it is a legitimate cause for one who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the faithful one, one extremity that is above the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer serrature of flesh in the nuts that are in the faithful one, and make it enter so that you know that the flesh is already in the nuts of the faithful one.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the faithful one, and pause in the nose according to the abstraction of a holy water, and make it for three days or more until you corrupt all that which is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for many days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if there are ends of treatment that exist, use those.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to make a purge, which makes distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And if you use silver or copper, which seems like a small lantern inserted, thus with a small tube, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube thus like a cane, and the handle of the instrument is a flat perforator, uncovered; which has a handhold in the back of it, with which you hold that which you want to suck out of the oil or what you want of the succulent causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these perforators are precious: a recipe of infusion of castor oil, white wax, ginger, and saffron, of long pepper, of scorpion's grass, of petum of spicy anise, and an ounce. You confound with the juice of bladder and of cabbage, and thus you make pills, and a pill is distilled in warm water, and it is given to the patient lying on their back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They are born naturally at the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Moist vapors are born naturally at the ends of the nose, and they are magnificent and mentioned in several days before it is easy to observe them.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason you should inject them at the beginning of their appearance, and eradicate all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then stop over the area with a cautery or burning medicine that was in place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the injection is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it has become putrid, hard, of dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that iron quart which is an aposteme of cruel wounds; because moist vapors are injected into that grand malice over that which it had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of a warm touch and not of dark color, and it seems that injection is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and inject without fear, and cure the area with water that exhales and constrains until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About the stitching of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarity.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when you apply a solution of continuity to one of these cartilages, few confer benefits in that operation except in some homes.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you find some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with holy blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with stitching, and then cure it until it is healthy.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you extract each part of its apparent code until it becomes holy.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with stitching and strengthen them, and on those sprinkle holy dragon's powder and three times, and place over the powder a piece of dialectical plaster, or of some other consolidating plasters, and leave it like that for two days or three, and then remove it and replace it with another plaster and leave it until the wounds are closed, and then cure with an ointment until it is healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with threads thus as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with faith thus as you and I know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Moist vapors come to some homes in the divided parts of their lips, some apostemes hard similar to fat errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you convert the lips and divide each of those hardnesses from all parts, and then absorb the umpliscas place with holy trinity until the wounds are restored, and then it is washed with a gentle agreement and the area is cured with water that is stipulated, until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the injection of adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A great abundance of moist vapors is gathered above the adjusted flesh gum, which the ancient physicians call bulbous, therefore it is necessary that you suspend it with a finger or hold it with forceps and inject it beneath the root, and let the healthy humor flow or the holy blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then stop over the holy trinity place or other stipulated powders or excitatives.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then inject it secondarily, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About the root of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and of those of the form and between the adjusted gums, there are scours, ulcers, and some moist vapors are blackened and are made citrine or green until the gum is corrupted by that decay and the teeth are ulcerated.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Then you should make the patient sit between your thighs and place their head on your tie, and hold their teeth in those which appear to be the same as the affected areas, and it seems that there is no break from any cause, and that is due to black bile and citrinitat and other internal causes that are not monodified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if it is established that it is in those of the beginning of the reasoning, well; and if not, then you will repeat the reasoning over those on another day and on the second and third until you come to the last statement that you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the teeth have need of many various forms of roots and of many figures according to how it is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for that reason the roots of the tooth are those which are rooted in the partition of the teeth, and another root is that which is rubbed between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots you should prepare as you will see shortly.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Because you cure the tooth of its pain with all your skill and tardiness in the complete eradication of it, for there is no cause that supplies the void left when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance within which excision occurs in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Moreover, because the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, you must be firmly certain what the painful tooth is, for many voids alleviate the pain and convince that it is a healthy tooth, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have not seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then how can you be certain what the painful tooth is, and what you know to be, then because you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gingiva of the entire partition, and then you move those threads gently, or subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concedes.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then you apply force with strong threads for good loquacious or sturdy stoppage, and pause the head of the patient between your thighs so that you hold them so they do not faint, and then you extract the tooth according to rectitude in a way that does not shake it, nor does the patient experience major pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it there in the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then because you complete the drawing of that trauma and strengthen those extremities with subtle roots so that it is not trapped at the time of your construction on that root.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And because you operate exceedingly in the scarification of the entire circuit of the gingiva and guard with your strength so that it does not shake and breaks apart from it, and return to the patient for the wickedness that is greater than the primary pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what foolish ignorant barbers do in their obstinacy and audacity over the eradication of them, for they do not administer what we have recommended; because many voids come about on the bad teeth, great difficulties which are more intricate than those that are trapped, and the roots of them all removed, or some of those, or that you extract from the osses of the mandible thus as many voids have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the eradication of it is washed with vinegar in water or agreeable salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if you induce fluxes of blood for that, thus as many voids induce, then you will try a certain quantity of wine and aspersion on the wound, and if it does not confer that wine, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and threads are subtle as those which are faintly moved at the beginning to extract the tooth, with a long handle and short, thick, so that they are not doubled when you must operate.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And thus as many times of thick handle until when you stretch them, they are not doubled, they are short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian iron, decently made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those are teeth which some enter into others and stretch for strong construction, and some voids in the extremities of those are in the form of a bird's beak, which has the name of cicónia, so it is guarded, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter xxvi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and extraction of osses from the trapped mandibles.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is trapped for some reason, then because you pause on the spot where it is bound for a day or two until the spot becomes mollified; and then you insert the instruments or threads of those which are assembled like the beak of a bird called cicónia or guarded, in the form of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The external remedies of their pain are made from these herbs cum lime or alfalfa.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey this experiment with these forceps or tenaculas, then it is necessary that you operate on the root and dissect all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has an atlas-like name, so it is a small lever of which the shape is like this.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It should be a short, thick extremity, and not be bent so that it does not get tired.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if the root is perforated, it is good; and if not, help yourself with other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you are helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form approaching the following.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the scraping of teeth; because it is made with this instrument which is assembled to an eye-sized granule, and this is the form.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extremity, curved or short, which has some thickness, and is not bent so that it does not get tired.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing you know is that the instruments for teeth are moved similarly and likewise the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to the mate's second opinion according to what it signifies about the operation and various diseases; because they are among the diseases that the ancients did not diagnose or pause with proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are tired, or if they are weak, then it is necessary to operate on that in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be with some small thickness little by little, and be held or kept in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is perforated; and then restore the place with convenient medicines according to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is small weakness in the bone, then scrape that from the weakness and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth are not according to their natural shape for those, then it is shameful, and especially when it comes to women, and especially to venerable elderly people; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not in proportion to another tooth, and it is not possible to straighten or align it, then root out that one; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you extract it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a pig's jaw, and made from Indian iron of extremely sharp extremity.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And it should be your extraction with which you extract it in three days for the durability of the tooth, and that it is not joined to another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file it with a file of Indian iron of which this is the form.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be all of Indian iron and the edge is sharpened; and it should be with many small points thus like a file in which they are made agitated, in which the tooth is filed little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth is joined and falls.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then polish it in the file, and scrape it with a razor's edge.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is tired and hinders the tongue, then it is necessary that you file it until the asperity of that fracture is stopped and smoothed, and it should be applied so that the tongue does not lead or the speech does not corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold filings or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the disease cannot be strengthened on what it affects, and you have treated it with medicinal powders, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that it does not become infected in those that are strengthened with gold filings and not silver, because silver becomes verdigris and is weakened after a few days, but gold at no time is altered.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And it should be the gold in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the gold and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuosities of the gold between two decayed teeth, or if one or many, until it reaches the web of the healthy tooth from the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then iterate the treatment until the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not decayed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your constriction is the one that strengthens the veins of the teeth, which do not decay.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then you insert the superfluous roots of the tooth with forceps or tweezers, and add those to each place in gestures, and convert them into occult ones between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then you release that thus strengthened with a Roman lock.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	Maybe it is dislocated or broken, strengthen it or them in another tooth in such a manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of two healthy teeth and of two decayed ones, thus as they are bound together at times.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their place, and are re-implanted thus as they had been recounted, and remain there.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not do that unless you are skilled craftsmen and wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some remedies are suitable for a cause of the cow's bones, and it is done in their form as a tooth shape, and it is placed in the location where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the incision of the ligament which you find in the tongue and prohibits speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which you find below the tongue sometimes grows naturally in men, or accidentally and suddenly due to a wound that has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is to open the mouth of the patient, the existing sky in the tie; and elevate the tongue, and then incise those nervous ligaments according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retention.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	Maybe in that there is some hardness or induration, and that has been established by consolidation of the wound, then you cut with a lancet and separate it according to the latitude until you have incised the ligament and the induration is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not a fracture in the region of the flesh and that you do not cut into an artery or vein, causing a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then you wash the remains of the incision with warm water or wine, or with warm fresh water; and then you pause below the clean tongue; thus it is customary to hold the patient's tongue below their tongue at any time so that it does not consolidate another wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Maybe it happens that there is a flow of blood, stop on the vitriolic place thrice; maybe if the blood comes out, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is convenient for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then you cure the other causes until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	About the extraction of a ranula below the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some remedies happen below the tongue, an abscess similar to a small swelling, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is to open the patient's mouth before the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that thing that is cancer.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onguent on him, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and incise it from all parts; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you stop three times above, thus it is vitriolic, until the blood is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then you return to your work until you have treated it with the complement of him, until it is washed with warm water and salt; and cure that with another cure suitable for this, until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	About the extraction of abscesses from two ears and of those that are nothing in the gullet and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When they occur in the gullet, then they are glands that are assembled together, which happen beforehand and are called two ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healthy, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that thing with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; before you let it mature, and then you can extract it, or it will be broken by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, radish-like, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is to consider, during your operation, if it has already rested the abscess of him with complete rest or if it has been diminished with some diminution; and then do seize the patient in front of the sun, and his head is in the sky, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between their hands before the tongue of him below with an instrument most noble of which this is the form.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or copper, and be subtle as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then, as you press upon the tongue and show it to him, and touch upon that tie which is beneath, then take nine and place it in the amulet, and pull it towards the divided parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that pulls out some cause from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of those is in the interior of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron indeed.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: It should be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one mole, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then apply the incision to the patient's gurgling throat with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, gurgle with water from the decoction of scorched millet or of myrtle leaves, and similarly to those of the stiping causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it until it is healthy.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some vegetables, namely in the gourd of other apostemes, have other golden leaves, and incise them according to what you did and said in the incision of two moles simultaneously.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already medicated a woman with an aposteme which was born in the gourd of it, which aposteme tended to turn dark-colored, with little sensation, which had already closed the gourd of it, and the woman breathed with great straining, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was about to die if you hadn't stayed there for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the aposteme had so strongly swollen that it had formed two ramps inside which they would issue through two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then you examine it carefully and place it in one of their corners, and pull it out, and insert it into the large portion, and then you incise it to comprehend the other tract, and then you obstruct its mouth, and comprehend its tongue, and then you place it in that corner of the aposteme.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you remove a large part of it, and nothing flows from it except a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the gourd of that woman is absolutely clear, and she begins to drink water, and then you take a walk, so you didn't cease to incise that aposteme many times for a long time, and the aposteme succeeds in its place, which is prolonged until it is finished.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you begin to cautery and cauterize the gourd of it, then thus of addition; and then you take a walk, and do not know that God did that miracle, and I myself did it.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 38.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a hernia when it is apostematized.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the hernia descends to the hollow, and it is apostematized and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not correspond, and sometimes it happens that the aposteme is cauterized because it has stayed subtle, then it is necessary to incise that which is accumulated round; and if it is at that length, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in its sentiment, then it is necessary to temper the incision of it, because there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you sometimes follow the method that you have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient seize with his tongue an instrument of which the process follows its form, and then place it in the new corner, and pull it out below, and incise it with one of two instruments which are said in the incision of two moles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise it except what is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, because if you incise it more, you will ruin its natural speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two moles, and cure it until it is healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, it is necessary to use skill in the cauterization of it with fear, and the manner of cauterizing it is not only with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient on the tieu seat, and then take the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and it corresponds to this living cause, and pause it not sparse nor subtle, and of that fills the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external application of the cavity where medicine is placed as if it were a conquavitat of a hernia, and place the instrument on the medicine over the womb, and the patient will spit out saliva or mucus from their mouth due to the intrinsic medicine, so that no disturbance occurs on the throat of the patient and that they do not despair because of that cause.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and express that over the uvula for a space of half an hour until it becomes disintegrated and settled by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the hernia, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the hernia into the cotton through a canal until the cotton adheres to it, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the hernia, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you indicate that you have tried the medicine, try it again, and then apply the cauterization by removing the cotton from the border, and modify what is in the circuit of the hernia with the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure beforehand with embrocation, and remove any bitterness until it is healthy.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of cure is more salvaging than incision and longer in terms of time.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounded are cured by the uvula with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calament, ysop, origan, rue, Arabic scicados, camomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them steep in vinegar and boil; and the bowl should be well-washed with decent water, and placed in a middle location of the bowl, a traverse above which an instrument conquau is placed, made of silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapour reaches the uvula through the tube, so that the uvula is not too obstructed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then try it on many wounded until it is dry, and be careful that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would too much adjust in the abscess, and do not think that you are doing it, but rather declare the abscess of the patient to be cautious.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if the instrument is not present to you, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of one closed in a hood, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closed hood prevents the vapour from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and of what adheres to the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many wounded adhere to the throat or spine of feet or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you will know that you extract what is apparent, upon which the sight falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument alone in the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you will know that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the throat will be forgotten through vomiting; or that the patient has eaten a piece of raw turnip or radish or a dry bread; or take a piece of dried seaweed, and tie it strongly with thread, and then translate the patient through this, so that when you perceive the place in which the spines are extracted, then it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with thread, and place it on the table and let it be extracted; or take a porpoise and let its meat and fat be extracted, and let its entrails be cleansed.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if it is not forgotten through those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it is more gross than a small radius, and in the extremity of the hernia which you insert into its throat with facility.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And elevate the ague to its highest point, and be careful that the touch of the sieve bone of the throat, so that it does not harm the body or what pierces the bone or spine, or what the doctor places on their hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But I think that the patient who inserts it is worse, because of their knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and pierces within, and pulls their hand with the instrument in them, all according to the quantity which is prepared until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood accumulated in the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is medicated in what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not comforts, consider then in the throat of the patient at sunrise, because you have comprehended the tongue of the patient with an instrument which you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you want to extract that small amount of blood or subtly and gently gesture underneath.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's groin area, and place the end of the cannula in the cavity of the ignited iron, and do so many times (until the bloodletting is finished and the patient is freed from the groin area) and abstain from giving the patient any drink for a whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of cold water, and place the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with that; and do not hesitate for any reason and give them water an hour afterwards, because the bloodletting is almost complete when they feel the water very cold.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Moreover, if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cumin or aniseed per the instrument that we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, for it is four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another manner of operation in the fumigation of that, which is to take a pipe on which are ignited coals and the pipe is covered with a covering in the middle of which there is a tube; and then give below the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodletting, because the bloodletting will take four days.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not take effect, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient drinks, and eat salty and bitter foods, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen is not forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodletting is treated from the groin area when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the groin area, and its end is similar to a beak of a stork, which is hollow, in which there is a small opening, so that, when you grasp something, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon on the perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of theirs, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs through two manners, one of which is for the species of abscesses in their measures; and because of what is comprehended about the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is proper for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because an abscess on the head is different from an abscess on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from an abscess in a joint; and each one of them has its judgment for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And many abscesses are such that they require not to be perforated but rather maturation of the Sania in those or completion of theirs.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other abscesses are those that require to be pierced when they are crossed, and do not mature according to their completion, like abscesses that are close to the joints, because an abscess when it reaches a joint, its essence is prolonged until it pours out what is in its circuit, and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, you will harm the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore pierce what has not matured; and do not require to pierce crudely, from incomplete digestion, but only that which is near the buttocks, so that you do not pour out its essence and it is elongated to the internal parts of the buttocks, and makes a fistula, or it becomes in the term of it what is not healthy.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You should know the time for piercing the abscess, and thus it is when it matures.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the reduction of fever, and also the diminution of redness and of pulsation, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you should know that piercing is done in the place where pus is beneath the abscess and comes out for healing from the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And piercing is always done for the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the place of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all hollow places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Moreover, when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to delay piercing until digestion of it is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; because if you pierce it then, it is prolonged the body of the pouring out and much foulness, and strongly endures the lips of it and the profundity of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Sometimes abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or of the body that needs treatment, or according to which member is injured.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer small perforations, and in large abscesses a large and ample or moderate section according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses are those in which it is necessary that the cord be constricted and enclosed, when it is done thus, and it is done in term that has already been established, thus as that which occurs in troops of dubléc and of buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus as the figure of the leaf of myrtle, thus as the abscesses of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which a round section is administered and a lunar section, and they resemble those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Sometimes that which does not have a head thus as are superficial abscesses of the lion, it is necessary to perforate that with a superficial perforation, or only plane alone.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected much sania, that you perforate it and do not touch it so as to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a part of it, and then place the abscess within another day, and then extract a greater part, and then make those evacuations gradual according to the graduation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or very old and decrepit, because the animal spirit is much resolved in the egress of the sania, and it strengthens the patient, and you open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	And beware of this chapter with great caution, and then make your perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, so that you abstergescas the wounds and consider thus if the wound of the abscess is small, or is a flat section, then you administer the qualguas of oil or of coto antic; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is necessary that you pause in some traction until they pervenguan ensemps.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cord has been cut off or has concaved into the circuit, then it is necessary that you complete it with much coto or thread made from the cloth of oil, thus as when one has treated pans or razizos, their humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then proceed to cure it and heal what needs to be healed of the enguentz until it is sanitized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Sometimes if there is a flow of blood during the hour of your operation, then you administer cold water and wine in those which mingle with a cloth of oil, and place that over the area of the flow of blood very gradually.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	Sometimes if the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and cure, and powder those which have been recommended in many places of our own book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	Sometimes if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary that you apply poultices with wine and oil, and pause those over the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then it is necessary that you apply poultices wrapped in water and oil or wine and oil, and all that should be cold until the third day, thus as we have said, and then it is necessary that you dislodge the abscess and abstergescas it and administer in the cure of what is convenient for it to be sanitized.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus it is necessary to know the cure of abscesses universally, sometimes according to the way of distinction already said about each abscess in which manner it is possible to cure it per capita singularly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	About the section of abscesses which come on the cord of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the cord of the small head abscesses, and it is about species of nodes which contain tunics that are there in fact; and the species of them are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are pungent, and those that contain humidity resemble a lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain humidity resemble pears, and they are similar to them; and those that are lumpy, are hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those that do not have fear, as one must extract those that do not make counter-irritation.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you sprinkle those with an instrument in the form of which you have approached thus, which is called entromes, until you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if it contains humidity, then you separate that into sections according to the longitude for a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line of .B. until the line of .G. Therefore, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that because it contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of all, because many gradual returns, if it remains from some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then you should immerse the affected area in a warm Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and otherwise, in water and salt; and fill the plague with that which enters into another day, because for that corrodes all so that it removes the roughness of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then you should apply the Egyptian ointment repeatedly to that affected area secondly and thirdly, if it is indicated for him, until you are confident that there will be no roughness due to any cause of that skin; then cure the plague with the ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you should cut into that following this method:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	You make a cross-shaped incision in the form of a crown, and cut between the two lips of the incision and scrape out all the affected part, and extract your virtue from the outer layer which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Maybe if you have made a counter-opening, then do so that you can first reintegrate the primary opening.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, you make an opening in the abscessed area of incision and of cure according to what I have told you; and making an incision over the abscessed area is less troublesome, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some veins are so close to these abscesses which are in the head of certain men whose veins are not humid; this causes because you have incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and touched the abscess thus with a rough, asperous, white, which could not be touched, and if some were about that percussion, it would plague.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Maybe in other accidental abscesses on the head there is no such capital, thus as with the abscesses that come to the heads of children and deviate from the roots of the ears, maybe the incision of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those of the affected part below the skin so that it is alleviated, and the body of the sanity is at the lower affected parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then cure those with what is convenient for that cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofula which occur on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Some swollen abscesses occur on the neck and in the axillas and in the armpits; and some swollen ones occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur on the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all the scrofula of those is within its own proper tunic, and thus as with the nodes and abscesses of the head, thus as I have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofula are many, because some of them are lapidous, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find with good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of that which is manifest is close to the color of the codena, and it is malleable to all parts, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not pendent, so that you should incise superficially on the upper part of the body under the line of G., until the line of B., and scrape out all parts, and extend two lips of the codena to eleven, or many eleven if you need those, thus as I have said about the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve should not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is a space not very narrow, that does not adjust to your hand in incision, or that it irritates the malaute, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised vein or artery and prohibited yourself from your operation, then pause on the veterinary plague treated with ointments or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the plague, and lay it there until the acuity of the abscess is repulsed and the plague is mollified and begins to be purulent.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is abstracted.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then investigate whether there is any cause of the other small scrofula, so incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is at the root of the large scrofula vein, then beware that you do not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Beforehand beware that you do not make that wound double-fold strong and that you leave it until it falls by itself, if it is not annoying.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the plague with old oil which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the entire scrofula, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the plague and cauterize as much as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Sometimes it happens that the abundance of scrofula has overflowed due to its greatness, so you should understand how to insert the root of it, and separate it and administer a suitable treatment.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in those scrofulous lesions that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation here at the site of maturation, and stop the perforation of what seems to be the pus at the bottom of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer perforation, or something similar that seems suitable to those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound has been cleaned, then you cure it with suitable generating flesh that grows inward so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	About the section of the pilum of the accidental aposteme that occurs in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients made this section in the epilhot, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has made it like that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Sometimes in men there is awkwardness, because the extraction of the epilhot should be avoided, since it would not be done juvenally for as long as all the veins and major parts of the thighs are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Sometimes in those who have abscesses cut into the mouth or groin or two auricles, when the malady is not in the dog, because they use the section of epilhot to flee from the loss which is made by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we should insert the epilhot below three circles of the circles of the epilhot, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles in quantity, so that the section is in cipher, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood that are near.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, then it happens that he extends the cord of the groin to the ankle, and then inserts the cord inward so that it reaches the canal, but avoids the blood vessels if you see any of those causes.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then insert the ciplach according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the flux that comes from that exit, which is of the disrupted body and for the abscession of the foot.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And thus the wound remains open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew only that sole to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow inward so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And thus Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended is an exposition that it is not only that you see that some of these apostemes have already operated on the groin of the thigh, and the thigh has come near to death, and its wings are between the thighs, and some go to insert the epiglottis so that the thigh breathes over the site of the wound for some respiration, and it is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason I command to leave the wound open until the evil of the malady is consumed; and it is the evil of it for three days; and then I command thus the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my own experiments is that a servant held a knife and put it in the right groin and inserted it into a part of the dog's lung, and I was called to cure it, and I began to touch the pus as it came from the dead, and I discovered the wound and touched the blood which was coming out of the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I must confess that it had not inserted a vein or guided, and the wind came out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not accuse the servant if he did not recover in the foot, and then some days returned to the administration of his own dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the section on abscesses that occur in the groin beforehand, and it is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess named hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, there is no need to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners of which the one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is made by nodulation of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And I do not think that it makes a presumption about him like iron except in the one that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that and investigate it with the said method, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then you insert it thus like the nodes, and extract it from what contains the skin and bursicle; and if not, then all the essence of the being is scrutinized, and then I cure the place with what is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of species of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The knots have many species and you already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And then I will recommend that you examine the difference between a knot and an excrescence with a dubious surface.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that an excrescence is a condition of heat and fever and vehement pains until the inflammation of the excess is sedated; and it is a complete putrefaction that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a knot does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains a certain thick fluid which is like a sac proper to it.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a wound and it is made thus as a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, which are either fat or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what you said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So then, when you approach the cure of a knot, you expose that one and inquire into its beginning with an instrument called introèmes, according to what will be seen in its form in the chapter which is about to come.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiring into abscesses and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you find humidity which you found in the abscess, and you turn the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then ultimately you place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the introèmes and consider what has been left in the residue of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity has been forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise on the surface section according to what I said about the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity in the residue of the introèmes, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And cut above it with a cross-sectional form according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as you are taught, and suspend it with onions, and clear the entire part to facilitate, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, above it and extract that sania from the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many times it happens that way, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if nothing remains of it, little or too much, the knot returns according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the treatment with some corrosive powders and strengthen the treatment, and pause over that which is an abscess caution, and cure another from the other treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large knot, then you cut the two lips of it and cure that which incarnates there.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse is contrary, or non-pulsating, then you touch and fill the place of the three-part ointment which is veterinary and leave it on for two days or for three until the plague subsides and the inflammation of the wound ceases; and then return to incise that which has been removed from the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the introèmes, and they are of three species, one is large, one is medium, and one is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introème is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium introème is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introème is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Made of iron, of alloy, with curved extremities decently, so that they fix the instrument in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiences, and they are named "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three species, which are large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experience, its form is:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium experience, its form is:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experience, its form is:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they are for those abscesses and excrescences and fistulas and bubos, so that among them there are some of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made of roots, thick ones, wounds, thus as large agulhas that are situated in the seats, and they are made of iron citrine, or of iron, or of steel, or of silver; And the best ones are when they are made of iron citrine.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of the experience of black plum, which ones are adapted to the fact that for those there are opened fistulas in the conquest of those which are reflected, and they are reflected with their levity in those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three species, which some of them are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its structure.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of an experienced great remedy:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of an experienced better remedy:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of an experienced small remedy:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the anointments are from many special species, because among those are some simple alcoves, which have only one curvature, and of three species: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their own anointments, and of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those anointments that have two curvatures, and of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of their own that have three curvatures, and of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple anointment, form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium simple anointment:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple anointment, form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large compound anointment:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium compound anointment, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small compound anointment, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large anointment that has two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium anointment that has two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small anointment that has two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large anointment that has three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium anointment that has three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small anointment that has three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels that are used to cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and they are of three species, because among those are large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those are which are made sharp and the other extremities not-sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather to be used gently in the excision of nodes, for fear of incision of vein or nerve, and so that the patient may be healthy and achieve tranquility, and also to avoid disturbing the adhesion which disturbs the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of emollients, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, also as they appear.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large emollient:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium emollient:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small emollient:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	There are many sorts of ointments and they resemble each other, which is made from aloes.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the pointed extremity of the spatula that is hidden and in that curve to the divided parts and beforehand, when you want, also as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are used to remove the debris from the abscesses and do not harm the patients, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cupping glasses which remove the flow of blood, and they are of three species; large, medium, and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	There are many sorts of citrus ointments, rounded ones with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these species of cupping glasses are large, medium, and small, so that they can remove the flow of blood with speed as needed, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, one does not use them to remove blood from every part of the body, and one uses them only in fleshy areas, such as on the muscles of the arms and legs, and on the flesh of the chest and abdomen, and similarly to those fleshy areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some evacuated areas are made from those other small instruments similar to scissors according to this form; for which the blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy, or there is incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some evacuated areas are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some evacuated ones are swollen breasts of some men who have the habit of sleeping with their arms like pillows, and thus they swell the breasts, and they are similar to the breasts of women, and Roman apostemoses, leaves.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who suffers from that, it is necessary to incise those with lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then excise the entire ugliness, and then fill the wound with medicated carnation, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with cosideration, and cure the one who is within so that they may be healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the lower parts and is softened by its magnitude also as it does in women, then it is divided into two lateral sections plus sub- sections, with two sections similar to a lunar figure, from which each one is contained in the other so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. And then excise the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure until it is healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which covers the inflammation of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the gap of the cut under the corroding gum and remove that which corrodes the root of the grayish nail, and then cure that which will be healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the piercing of abscesses that come from beneath the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from beneath the nipple are a type of scrofula, harsh, which contain a pus that is sacred.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the liquid has been evacuated from the abscess of the sania, then you complete the cut well and leave the entrance open for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cut should be dressed and cared for in a conveniently absorbent way, until it is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the species of the nodes is, and of the scrofula, then you should make an incision above that area as we have said in the section about scrofula incisions.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the wound is extended to such an extent that it becomes putrid, then administer a cautery according to what we have previously mentioned about that.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	About the incision of abscesses that are caused by arteria or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery is broken, and the code is consolidated which is above that, then many veins are caused to produce an abscess. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is through the artery, it is often aggregated in the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the veins.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through the vein is reflected in the obvious manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the incision about this abscess is erroneous, and it increases in those that are beneath the wings, and in the corners, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to eschew its cure, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, it is necessary to avoid.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Maybe about that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, an incision should be made in the code at the front; and then the incision should be widened with a knife and the artery should be opened, and the tunics should be removed until it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place a thread about that needle and make it penetrate until the other side, and strengthen the artery with a double ligature in two places, — which causes you to have a surgical technique for extracting two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then puncture the place where two ligaments are spaced apart until the blood flows out of it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which it is generated pure until the ligaments fall; and then take care of that which is conveniently adapted to that until it is healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess by incision of a vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what is possible of the abscess in the code, and then insert the needle beneath the place where you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and it should be in double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a good ligature according to what I have told you about the ligature of the grape, which is on two parts at two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Maybe if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the thread into the needle beneath all the abscess, from the incision of the primary needle, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then cut the abscess in the middle place of it until when it is situated that which is in it, then you incise the superficies of the code, and remove that which is linked to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then pause about the pus which has submerged in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with warm compresses and conveniently adapted until it is healthy.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 51: About the abscess that is caused by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus it is caused by abscess in arteries and veins, and similarly it is caused by abscess in the nerves when it is caused by their percussion or excessive trembling, and by similarity.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the manner of it in the places of the adjutants or of the ankle, or in every place where the joints are flexible.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and it is similar to the color of another body, and it is in the major dispositions of its own laws when it is straitened with vehemence, feeling in it a similar stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the front of the body, and therefore it is beneath the code, and it has been divided into total parts and does not go to the previous or following parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is not surprising that those who are in joints do not want to be inflamed with iron, because strong contraction of the limbs occurs.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Perhaps he who is on the head or on the forehead feels the codeina in the spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Maybe it is a small abscess, then you have the forces and remove that from the roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it in a hook, and excavate that, and then stop that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .li.	Headache.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From the section of the abscess that comes down from the chest to the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It happens to some people who have putrefied matter in their stomachs and in other parts of the body that are called fungal abscesses due to similarity with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head is large; and already their lips are altered, and it is of those who are small, and it is of those who are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in their stomach there were two abscesses that were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white things, of small roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already their lips were turned inward and split, and humidity flowed from that entire time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I inspected them and made an incision in one of the feet, about 18 ounces. and the other about 6 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation on the incision of their wounds is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, of subtle roots; then you make a wide incision with a spatula, and you are in your presence with cauteries at the focus, because many putrefied matters are expelled from the section of the patient; and if you find the sanies, cauterize them.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is poor and timid, beware of incision with iron; rather then take a piece of recently melted lead, and strengthen it on that tissue, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it there for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it on the structure of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease strengthening the large lead grain in the tissue, until it is absorbed and falls through its own effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Maybe it is of large roots, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Maybe it is possible that you make an incision on its death, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure it until the wound is healthy.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to incise the tissue that is of dark color, of little sensation, of light regard, because that is almost cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I find it in remembrance of cancer and also similarly.
Capitol .lii.	Headache. ii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	About the treatment of the prominence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Prominence of the navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the ciphac which is above the stomach, and sometimes the web or intestine according to how it ends in other ruptures; or by sanies that flow from a vein or artery as it has been said before, or by constricted ventilation in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	Maybe it is due to a fissure of the ciphac and by movement of the web, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is a gentle pain, and then appears in diverse situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to egress of the intestine, then the situation of that is in water that we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and as you press on that with your fingers it is occultated, and then returns; and strong is the case, and it is magnificent with many introits of bath and vehement effort.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Maybe it is due to humidity, then it is gentle and not occultated when you press on it with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it created.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to sanies, then at that time the abscess appears black and declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	Maybe it is due to bad flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	Maybe it is due to ventilation, then the touch of it is gentle.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to sanies of artery, or of vein, or due to ventilation; then you must be prohibited from the treatment of it, because in that there is fear and pain also as you have seen in the chapter where I said about abscesses due to artery and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the web, then you must command the patient to hold their belly still, and it must be standing extended; and then make a sign with your hand in the circuit of the whole navel, and then command them to stand turned inward between their hands placed above the belly, and then circulate with a wide spatula in the circuit of the navel above the place where you have made the sign with your hand; and then extend the death of the abscess to the parts below an inch large; and then tie in the circuit with a strong thread or chain and the manner of the liar's decent treatment.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And if you have already extended the membrane of the aposteme over the ligament and inserted the thin thread into that index finger, and if you did not touch or guard the ligament, then you extract the hardened area and push back the intestine to its proper place in the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the web, then take a pinch of that uncleanness; and cut away the excess flesh from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Perhaps it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle that word, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong veins and insert the two needles into the circuit which has made a circle around the aposteme in many ways of crossing, which makes them penetrate; and then strengthen the aposteme in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area inside where the extended flesh will collapse by itself; or cut away what is subtle and will collapse, and then cure that uncleanness which comes from the abscesses inside so that it may be healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or humidity, then it is necessary that you conquer the aposteme thus as we have said and extract the blood or humidity, which it attracts in itself, and then cure that uncleanness which comes from it and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Cure of Cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have spoken, in the division, of a species of cancer and in what manner it is possible to reach the cure of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid in the cure not to make it worse so that it does not ulcerate; and we have spoken of cancer generated in the marrow and caution of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And we have said that some ancient physicians thought that certain rooted cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus like cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and similarly in the members allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	Perhaps when it is ancient and grave, it does not seem that you can appropriate it to yourself, because you cannot heal from that ulcer nor have I seen another, nor has it been brought to that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is what has been allocated thus as we have said, that you should precede and leave the bad humor and purge away the black bile of certain rooted ones, and then you will know that, if it is a manifest replenished repetition.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the bad humor with preparation in which place it is located for operation, and then prohibit in the tract uncis those that go to that; and then concave all parts of the code so good for perexcrutacio inside that no remainder of any cause of its roots.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that lightness, and express the places, and remove the thick blood entirely from your hand or instrument in which it is possible for you to use of the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps if you have counterflow of thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that inside so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure that uncleanness with another cure so that it may be healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Cure of Hydropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the species of hydropsy of water, and the signs of each species, for the cure of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not only the species of solitary altitudes, and it does not approach with iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hypochondriacs, because that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of hydropsy timpanistre with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the bad humor has already been debilitated, or it is in that other bad humor another hydropsy, thus as it is in the whole body or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Perhaps if you have the bad humor of exuberant virtue, and in it there is no other bad humor but only hydropsy, and not childish nor old, then the manner of operation on it is that you elevate the bad humor between your breasts, and the minister then presses the belly of it with his hand, filling the water at the lower part of the navel, and then takes a spatula spiny according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is of two sharp points long, of sharp extremity thus as spatula; perhaps however it is in some brief smallness little by little, so that in the operation on that it does not pass into the intestine, and that leads to that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydropsy is from part of the intestines, because then it is necessary that you section yourself alone at the navel for the quantity of three fingers to the lower parts, in the direction of the navel above the pubic area.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Perhaps if the generation of hydropsy is due to bad humor of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of it is through the mixture, then your section should be in the right direction.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not cover that your section should be above the rib above which you want to make a massage for that area, so that the superfluities do not flow back to that free place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then perform with the instrument throughout the entire code, and enter into that section, and elevate your hand on the spatula between the code and the siphac, and you extract it; and if the quantity of an ounce or surrounding.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then perform the siphac until it reaches the spatula to the desired place, and that is the place of the evacuation.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract it and introduce an instrument whose shape is this:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver canal subtle; it is made of silver or copper or golden alloy, at which in the lower part of it there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is the extremity of the instrument inserted according to the manner of a feather, thus sometimes.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper extremity of it there is a small handle, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that tiny amount descends onto the instrument, thus evacuating the water at the right moment in the proper quantity, because if you evacuate more than that at the wrong time, it will greatly harm the patient by resolving the animal spirit, or it approaches the fifth crisis which is near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	You evacuate it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the disposition of the patient's virtue of the pulse and the goodness of the patient indicate to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it, because it is retained so much by the code that retains the tube which is above the siphac, of which I recommend to you that you perform it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then try the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it sometimes, and extract a small quantity of water, and do that for several days on an empty stomach, and beware of error so that you don't leave too much water behind.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and leave a large quantity of water, then cure that which is buried in hot sand, and cover it with a cloth, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure that with desiccative medicines until it is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the mixture and the fatigue as you have recounted in that which precedes regarding the extraction of water.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 5.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with non-perforated urinary places.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some born children are thus from the womb of their mother and the top of their mixture is not perforated (or the tube is straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it is necessary to make a perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very subtle spatula according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then stop in the tube a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you will pass three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when one wants to urinate it remains and hurts; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the lead, already it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not leave this clarity.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that of which the tube is straight should be medicated with a lead key, thus as we have said, for several days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the tube is not in its place, are led astray, because of that, he who is born and the tube is deviated from the end of the virgin head so that it cannot urinate to the divided parts, until it elevates the virgin to its hand to the upper parts; and it is not according to generation, for thus the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a great malady.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient is placed on their back, and then extend the head of the virgin to your left hand with vehement extraction, and insert the head of the virgin's head into the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, thus as it is inserted like a feather, or you do not touch any part, so that the middle of the virgin appears similar to the head of the virgin and the tube falls into its proper place according to what is necessary.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times accidents happen there; and stop at the moment when you absolve the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 6.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the treatment of those who suffer in the prepuce at the head of the virgin and of corruption and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce at the head of the virgin.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many born children suffer from this treatment on the virgin and it is an emergence of great flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation:
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if it is malignant, by the law of color, then you should administer cautery at the incision site and according to its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if it is in the foreskin of the penis, uncircumcised, and one part of it is buried in the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove that which is buried from the beginning so that it is consolidated; and then you cure what is outside, because when you cure what is inside, it is not assured that it will not be troubled.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also accidents happen in the genitals and in the black and corrupted foreskin, therefore you should conquer all that which is already denigrated and wants to corrupt or has been corrupted; and then apply liniments over that which is good, which is contaminated with the powder of scorched millet and of bitter roots and crumbles.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then heal it with another cure so that it may be healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery in this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because juvenile cautery is at two opportune moments, namely a flow of blood and the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and is destroyed entirely at that hour, then you should introduce into the middle of the foreskin a pipe of lead so that the patient may urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion only happens in one whose foreskin is so, and upon it no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or aposteme) you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely liberated from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish those exquisite things, then you should scrape with a spatula for some reason of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a subtle drawing, which has already been softened in warm water so that they do not adhere again another time.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be cured with a six-day stipation so that it may be consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 47.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the cure of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuity thus with the other plagues: but we will rather do it with our own operation and will, and those of that sort are properly in children, it is necessary that we assign a better operation and a more gentle path to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use it in their writings, and it is only because we have acquired it through experimentation, which causes us to have discovered the majority of artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a new and torrid method; and they use ligament with faith and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already prohibited all these methods and did not discover better purification with forceps, with ligament with faith that in purification with the nail, because many times the code escapes downwards, because the code of the foreskin has two tunics, and one tunic is below, and therefore it is forced to another incision and sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the purification which is done by alphabetic method, and is digital, which the sabatiers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not assured, because it goes inside the channel of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, therefore you should beware of iron and corrupt your own operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the code of the child is brief by nature, and many times it is seen in such a way that there is no need for purification, and you have already seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But from the purification that is done with forceps and ligaments with faith, goodness, experiment discovers in me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, for which the acuity that is below is thus with the acuity that is above; and therefore as you premise your hand so proportioned to two acuities, and incise accordingly in a single time; and it is made compression of the faith in a figure containing the code of the penis of all parts, in which no error can be found.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you do not do anything but place your faith in its penis only thus, and that you leave it until another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then you should try to cheer him up in that entire manner which is possible for you to receive his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then you should have him sit between your arms steadfastly prepared, and do not be without caution; and hide the forceps in your hand or place them near the thigh, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the patient's groin and feel in the cavity, and pull that inside so that it exits the head of the groove, and then declare what is accumulated there from the patient's dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then read the marked place with double faith, and then bind below that one little second ligament, and then have your finger placed on the said spot and hold the place of the ligament well below in good retention, and insert it between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the cavity upwards gently and extract the head of the groove; and then let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and pause with powder on top and over the powder place a cloth in which there has been spread a mixture of oil from a recent rose, well-concocted and well-rosated; and let that stay on until the next day; and take care to cure it thoroughly so that it may be healthy.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps is for declaration, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some of the extremities are not-aligned and the others are aligned, so that they don't reach the branch of the nail, and their length is like the length of two bent fingers together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in declaration is because you forcefully opened the entire internal cavity, or partly removed it from its insertion.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So you should extend that of your hour to your finger in the apostemic position of the place and insert it according to equal equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed, and you see that it is inflamed below the apostemic groove, then let that enter so that the cautious aposteme may be calmed, and excavate that which has been facilitated, and insert it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the groove, lest you hurt yourself with it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then take care to consolidate that wound with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is inserted into the cavity with measure, and you observe the parts above, that does not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And take care to heal that wound as we have said, so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 48.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by inflammation or by flesh, and it resembles those things that we have said about the manners of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the retention of it is by a stone which already exists in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over the two knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then you should place the feet of that one on the knee two and extend the knee of the belly from the part above the knee two, and the patient stretches his knee as much as is possible to him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So then the neck of the bladder is constricted for the expulsion of the stone to the back parts, so that the urine may be absolute.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved in that which we have said, the vehement cause is made above the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and its nozzle should be subtle, like a canal of a small bird's feather, subtle in length like a ray of a long palm and half, on which there should be a subtle cane at the head of it.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of injection of urine for that is to take the doubled thread and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good liaison; and you insert the extremities of the thread into the part below the syringe, and you insert them with forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but then introduce it into the canal with vehemence. And then you enounce the syringe at the border and at the album of oil.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on a chair, and envelop the bladder with it and the groove in olive oil and oil of roses.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe to facilitate it so that it reaches the root of the groove; and then double the groove below at the part of the navel; and then you fill the syringe with that; and then you fill it so that it reaches the bladder, and this thing makes the patient be free from the vain cause, and it is not done in this order, but rather the opposite, where it goes to tortuousness.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually stretch out the little finger on the small wool, because the urine dries the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And extract that and do for the cure of urine, and use a circle, do not cease to make that and use a circle until the bladder and the patient's trouble are alleviated.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 6.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	About the quality of evacuation of the bladder with a clenched hand and similar instruments which are suitable for that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is constricted by poultice, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then make use of an instrument called a clenched hand, and this is its form.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but on the outside of it is a tube, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three channels: two from one part, and sometimes also another time.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is a concave place, in which is what is swallowed, and it is according to the quantity that oppresses it, until when some cause is withdrawn from the humidity, it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what makes the clenched hand phlebotomize in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to draw humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of the clenched hand into the humidity, and withdraw with that water which is swallowed from the above-mentioned parts, because the humidity is withdrawn into the cavity of the clenched hand.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of the clenched hand into the rod according to what we have recommended in the circle; and then swallow the humidity with that water which swallows, because that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle crystallizer by which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is so small that it resembles a little feather, and afterwards the channel is gently bent.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the crystallizer into the rod.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then stretch out your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that the humidity has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make it into that circle; and perforate it with all its returning flexibility; and then insert a strong thread through those channels, so that they are revolved; and then add the circle so that it is also added to the saffron, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and olives and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that to the instrument and make it so that it is done as it was done in the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 10.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone on which surgical operation is done by hand, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now present a clear and brief exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects the elderly; and of its signs is that the urine which is excreted from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels his rod, and many veins are gathered there, and then it is dressed; and in that water they make a hole in the cul-de-sac of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is a consolation for the health of the children of that until they have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young it is half-cured because it is among those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which modifies the patient with a crystallizer which extracts all the filth that is in the two hollow vessels; because that filth some gathered veins prohibits the formation of the stone from the investigation of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient is pressed with the two feet and is constricted and massaged below so that the stone descends to the floor of the bladder, or jumps out of its place through some gathered veins.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and the hands of it are afterwards the whisks of it, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the below-mentioned parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then thoroughly clean that entire area beforehand.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, then you will touch it at once with a dry cloth over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel the entire toe at once, then put oil on the toe indicated by the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the ring finger if they are young and complete, and insert it into the hollow of the knee.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And thoroughly clean the stone until it comes out from the said toe.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually bring that small thing down into the hollow of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press above that on the said toe, and expel it through the parts in front of the place where you feel the dryness.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister to extend their right hand between the genitals, and place their other hand remaining on the codename which is behind the genitals, in the part of the place where the dryness is felt.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatulum between the incident of which this is the shape of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and divide the water that is between the knee and the genitals, not in the middle place, above the left thigh; and let the dryness be on that stone and the said toe, and let it be a transverse dryness, so that the dryness beforehand is wide and strongly stretched according to the quantity that you extract from the stone as much as possible, and no more, because too much compression of the said toe which has the stone would be forgotten, and it would be facilitated by its own deficiency.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you will know that the stone is somewhere in which it has an angle and margins, because the evacuation of it is made difficult by that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And in that water, it resembles a lens-like stone, and it is round, and it is difficult to evacuate it.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is the one with angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forgotten, then you will arrange over that, or you will stretch over that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on the one you stretch over the stone, and do not avoid it; or you will insert beneath it the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot reach it, then you will enlarge the tube a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it with a glass tristressed with vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you will push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it over it; and then push a little further into the water; and similarly you would do if there are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance is that you insert it with great dryness, because it harms the patient in one of two ways: either it kills or it prevents the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion of it from within until it is forgotten, or insert into the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and stretch it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And put on that wounded area an infusion of oil and wine, or oil rosated and cold water, so that the post-wound caution may be cooled.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then rest the patient on their back, and do not disturb the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that is disturbed, moisten the place with water and much oil, and then heal it with a gentle icon and a gentle bazilicon until it is healthy.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound apostema causes bad ulcers, and it is adjusted and corroded, and it seems thus as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and therefore the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the egress of the blood with the urine), then insert the said toe into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it will provoke the bladder to corrupt and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply an opposite to all species, with what is convenient for it in terms of cure until it is healthy.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And see to it during all the hours of the entire cure that you read and adjust the medicines which are placed on the spot.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and it is in the meat of the bladder, and it is fixed in it, and the urine is prohibited, then cure it with what you recommend beforehand, because many vegetables are useful for this cure and are accused of dryness; and already you have spread it, and it is that you take a perforator of iron alloy, of which this is the shape of it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, pointed, fixed in a fist.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And take hold of the vein, and place it in that position on the rock so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And insert the iron into the vein, making a perforation so that the perforator goes to that rock.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the perforator with your hand on that small rock little by little, and you will make the perforation of it so that the other part can penetrate; because the urine is almost absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And place your hand on that which is rough from the rock of the affected part before the vein, because it is bruised, and it is ulcerated in the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Maybe this cure is not adapted to you for some cause that prohibits it, then place a vein beneath the rock, and another vein above the rock.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And enclose the rock in that vein between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And extract that one.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And dislodge the ligament and clarify the congealed blood, which is done in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to ligate the vein beneath the rock, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the vein is dislodged, the channel of the rock returns to its place and closes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to ligate the vein above, so that you elevate the channel to the upper parts, or it returns to its own complete complement, and closes the wound thus, as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 16.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Maybe you see a stone in some of those, then the cure of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman's foot is veined.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you do not find a woman who knows how to describe the measurements of the doctor when it is cast, or they are of the married women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is because you have not found a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with my hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the section on stone in women is far from the place of the stone, because it requires a deep incision, and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Maybe you need to provoke you to that, then it behoves that you take a wise woman who knows how to extract, and few are skillful.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Maybe you are deprived of that, then seek a wise and subtle woman who is experienced in the practice of women, or presents a mature woman who has knowledge in this art, or a woman who has a share of the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that present, and command it to do all that you will order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that you examine if the woman is veined, then it behoves that you put your finger in her vagina and seek the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, extract it beneath your finger, and then command it to insert above it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Maybe if it is not veined, then command the matron to insert her finger in the conch of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehends it with good comprehension.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, then it behoves that you gradually draw it away from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts with your hand in a semicircle until you perceive it at the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert upon that supposition of the magnitude of the conch to the root of the thigh of whichever part is at its boundary and sent the stone in that part, and the finger of it is not removed from the stone extracted beneath it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section is little at the beginning; and then insert the radius above that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know that the stone will be extracted from it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the species of stone are many: because among them is small and large, and rough and smooth, and long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you know how many species are of it for that which you signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust at the vitreous place three times and hold it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is ulcerated.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make that you prepare with the instruments which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that they will be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is inserted, then you stop powder on the place and strengthen that with pulvils and strict descent, and do not iterate that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because soon the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the blood is calmed down, then put on warm wraps, and at that place you will return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	About the section on hernia and cough.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane which is below the codena of the genitals containing the fluid, and it is named membrane.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some fat women are in their own natural preparation of the fluid in the partition of the fluid, until it is known that it is another fluid; and it is the codena of the genitals between the white membrane which we have mentioned, and it is not that but bitter.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which afflicts the genitals, because for those it is fundumental matter, and some old women are afflicted by percussion or a blow on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or bloody, or red, or it is black and foul, or it is whitish and pale, and that is what is worst.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known are these: because if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then the abscess is red and declining a little in length, thus forming the figure of fluid, and it appears in the genitals, because the humidity contains all this from every part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in its own natural partition, then the abscess is red in the partition of the fluid and thus one estimates that it is another fluid.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the codena of the genitals and the white membrane, then you will find it below the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you will spread the color of the humidity in the abscess within the entrails of the patient whose form is preceded; and according to what has been said in the vestige of the entrails, judge from that which has been defined.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the cure of the iron wound, then it is fitting that we command the patient to be flebotomized if it is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the patient.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then place a suppository on each of the two seats above some cause a little higher, and pause below the word drops.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place you on the left side of it, and command the minister to follow on the right side of it, which extends its verge to one of two layers at the codena of the genitals and at the partition of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and separate the codena of the genitals from my middle place for the length until you reach the pentagonal.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make a section according to the rectified engagement distant from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white membrane comprehending.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excavate that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not incise that; and your excavation is the one that excavates for partition thus far as it is suspended in the worst fluid and subtly scrutinized in the excavation according to the quantity at your possibility.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the full membrane of water in a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two labia of the section with uncials, and extend the membrane to the upper parts; and do not touch the codena of the genitals comprehending, and incise the membrane in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that in its entirety or in pieces, and majorly widen the seat subtly, because if you do not scrutinize the incision of it exquisitely, it is not made securely so that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the fluid proceeds from that defect of its membrane at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the membrane, return to define that, and then adjust the two labia of the codena of the genitals with a suture, and then heal that as well as the other wounds, until it is sanctified.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the fluid corrupted by another bad mixture, then it is fitting that you lift the vessels which are above the suspenders, and extract the fluid, and then heal that as well as we have mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you know that the two are hernias; therefore incise that part according to what has been done in the other engagement; and if it is at your sight that it is an operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you purify the blood, and enter into the sections of the submerged lana or in oily rose; and pause before another lana which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over two genitals and the miracle of the belly; and pause above drops double-weighted and pulvis, and tie those above with a liament which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And you should press two cloths and fill in the lanolin ointment according to this similarity; and fill in the extremities with those that are previously treated with cotton or lanolin humid, and add structure to the breeches of the breeches, and one extremity takes hold of the backside into the buttocks, and the second takes hold of the parting of the perineum, and two extremities over two thighs here and two extremities over two ankles, and the entire structure is adjusted in the breeches of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Some hernias are artificially treated with cauteries in place of sectioning with iron; and it is that you take a cutellar cautery subtly and that you insert it into the code of the genitales, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until it is discovered the white ciphac containing water, and then you take the cautery according to this form.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled into a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce the ciphac, and it is ignited until all humidity is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the ciphac to inches, and scrape in inches, and scrape with a subtly ignited cautery; and insert it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the fire that it does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more salvaging and longer-lasting than the flow of blood, and better than an operation with sectioning.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Perhaps you have made a contrary apostema in the hour of sectioning or in the hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then it is necessary that you cure which contrariety you make for yourself, with a curative treatment that convenes to him according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Perhaps the patient is poor, and does not hope for the second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what you have recommended here; and it is when it is certified by you, because of what we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is necessary that you elevate the patient on some elevated seat, and then pierce the apostema in the lower part of the body with a spatulum lat, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let it be a wide perception until all the water is drained out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then pause over the cold spot and lift it there, so that the remaining water drains out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Perhaps the contrariety is at the urgency of the water in that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except to quarrel with the white pannicol in the orrifice of the wound, which makes contrariety and prohibits the exit of the water; then it is necessary that you put in the wound a penal instrument or one which extracts the water from the hydropits, in the form which precedes; or adjust on the opposite side of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and it is augmented for six months or in those environs; and when it is augmented, then it should be pierced according to that method of manipulation, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On sectioning about fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the sectioning about this hernia, there is a persistent fear of losing a limb in the major dispositions; because to me it has been seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are reminded of the operation on those and the species of the apostemas.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the apostemas are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: or for an acute sharp inflammation, which is poured out to the genitals, or for percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the apostema according to the color of the body, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a heavy apostema.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And I have seen an apostema lapificada, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some hernias are made for swelling of the arteries, and for inflammation of those as well which I have perceived the remembrance of it, or for inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Perhaps that which is for inflammation of arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the apostema when it comprehends those in the tender fingers; and it does not touch that.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	Perhaps that which is made for inflammation of a vein is not dispersed from it by any cause, unless the compression is in the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that about this species a section is made and about the other carnals; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and then stop the fire at the upper parts, and extract that from the white ciphac, and deliver the suspenders of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspenders so that you deliver that from all parts of the fire.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if you have already consolidated those injured limbs, then it is necessary that you extract the patient and insert them into a warm place.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if it is adhesion between some part of the hip, or between that which is between the pelvis, then it is necessary that you release all that adhesion and insert it for round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Maybe it is a birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that is of it, and extract the patient thus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with lanolin ointment and rose oil; and then take care to heal that wound with another cure until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernia that occurs in childhood.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess enveloped by some similar enveloping like a tumor with mollification of the testicles, and it is made difficult to exercise movement and walking on the affected limb.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is by fear for that which is preceded by remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to say that I will operate according to what the first authorities did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to place the affected limb on an elevated stool; and then apply padding to the suspensors of the testicles at the lower parts; and then you will hold the codena of the genitals with the ties that are tied to the pelvis, which are probable to be in a virgin state; and you have those other ministers who are assisting you, and extend them with vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert a spatula to separate the agglutinated part by making a transverse section in the right of the veins, until the veins are discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape out the entire affected part thus as you have said in extracting the roots of the arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place them in those needles in which there is double faith, and tie it to the first of the places where life thrives, and tie another vein at the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert them in the middle place for right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added to the fetid and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with a cure of other wounds in which you want to be healed, so that the veins, which are not nourished by one of the two genitals, may not become bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Maybe it thrives in all the pelvis, then it is necessary that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for that are separated from the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment for the incision of the veins, and that they are stabilized, or that it is separated for that so it does not grow youthful in those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by section that ends in the extended hip over the belly on the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that by giving way to the intestines of that rupture, it adds to the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the hip or of exhaustion of it, and it occurs in these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by fall, or by shouting, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the hip, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess gathered within until you feel the pain, so that the hip compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is by section of the hip, because at the beginning it causes vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess appearing below the fallen codena, and that is by swelling of the intestine, and the body of it is in the parts before the hip.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some veins are forgotten in the intestine, and this intestinal hernia is called zigibal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some veins are made in the ventosity, and some veins run into the intestine's end, and here it is retained, and it is with great pertinacity of the illness, and some veins make evil pain and major worsening when it is premature.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the species of this illness iron is used, for it is necessary that the cauterization be avoided in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand at the lower parts of its cavity if it obeys the usual return, and then it is invested over the column between the two hands, and raises the legs of it.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stop the codena which is the codena of the testicles at the lower parts, and insert the entire codena of the testicles for the length; and then place it in two labia of the section uncis according to what is necessary to close the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if you section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to do, then from that the man may be restored.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then scrape off that crust which you have on the vertebrae of the back, until the white crust is discovered from a certain part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When you insert the finger into that which is the vertebra, in that which is between white crust, which is on the back of the man, and between the crust according to, and absorb with that adhesion which is in the part behind the man.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then move the hand on the back of the vertebrae to the fore parts, and also extend the white crust with your left hand, and elevate the man to the crust at the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the man thus and you dissolve the adhesion which is behind in a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with your fingers to see if there is no cause of the intestine wrapped in the white crust.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find some cause, then you inject that into the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle in which there are twelve threads, and insert it behind the crust, which is on the back of the vertebrae, which is the section; and then insert the extremities which emerge from the thread until there are four threads, and then compose some knots over each figure in the manner of a cross; and tie that crust about which we have said that it is on the back of the vertebrae with strong ligament of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then envelop the extremities of the threads and tie them with violent ligament until some of the vessels that you have touched do not transmit any cause, so that from here on, an abscess does not form.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another ligature according to the first ligature, a distance of three fingers; and then apply two ligatures below the crust which is on the back of the vertebrae, in the quantity of the greatness of the finger, and insert all the remaining part roundly, and remove from there the man.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert into the part below the back of the vertebrae for sectioning of that which flows pure and healthy blood, just as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the ligature which we have recommended (and some crusts of white crust are cauterized, which we have said, then the insertion of the tempestuous flux of blood, because many times it happens) and release the ligature until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the healing of the wound is delayed, then warm water should be poured over it, and pause on that until it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with another cure of wounds until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of windy hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been hardened under the cure of iron with him.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first doctors said that it is done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with us; which is to lift the vessels to the section above that man who has been facilitated by him; and then cut in the middle place around the abscess, so that the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that is done in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some times it happens to rupture in the joints thus as we have said, and emerge from the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not assign any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged in that, it is adjusted fissure in the crust until the intestine descends into the crust; and it happens thus for the extension of the crust which is in the joints as we have said, which causes because the crust is extended, and then it is mollified and the place becomes abscessed and emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of him is by cautery thus as it has preceded the narration of him.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on his back between his two hands, and then cut the place of the rupture of the abscesses emerges in section for the latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white crust that is on the back until it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rod and pause it over the prominent place of the crust, and press it to the prominence of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then kiss the two prominent places over the extremity of the rod of the crust, and adjust to the suture one with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the rod, and do not insert anything into the crust at all, nor extend the man, nor any other cause thus as you will know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then you should treat that wound with the cure of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, clarify and restore the wounded area until it is consolidated; because the scar is contrary and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	The cautery is better in this place, for it is more suitable for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	About the softening of the cod (testicles).
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The cod (testicles) of some men is softened in certain ways because it is softened by the fat that is between them, and it is affected by their attention.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary for one who is engaged in the cure of it to make the patient lie according to his two hips, and incise the entire cod which is softened above the natural cod; and then adjust the two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, then at the beginning, remove the excess of the softened cod with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the stitches; and then heal by healing the other wounds until it is healthy and the abscesses are cleared.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	About Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I was led to remember it in this book; and there is no need for remembrance of it except for two reasons, one of which is that it should be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in that, who knows the cure of it when it occurs; and the other reason is that we sometimes have need of castration of other beasts to improve our livestock, like mules, and oxen, and pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by sectioning the seed.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	Moreover in that which is done by attrition, the method of operation is that we make the beast drink hot water until its genitals are softened and loosened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand into the earth until they are dissolved and do not appear to be there anymore.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Moreover in castration done by sectioning and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles to the left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspensors, and incise above each testicle in one section until two testicles are separated.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those parts so that you can extract some excrement.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those of the scar, but rather the subtle scar which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly leaves some cause on the testicles so that the beast desires to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then heal the wound until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	About the cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodism in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears in that which is in the space of the testicles, in which there is a figure like a female's womb in which they are felt.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some veins come out from that cord which is in the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Moreover, in women it is a species: and it is that the womb of the woman above the perineum is similar to two testicles of a man, a little smaller in all its miniatures, with a partition before, similar to the perineum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: two from men and one species from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you incise those adjusted flesh until it evacuates the impression of that, and then you cure those with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine comes out, which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	About Abortion and Eminent Flesh caused by Women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Abortion is strongly adjusted according to natural causes until it is detained and done with regard; and some veins are magnified in some women so much that it spreads like in men and pervades into the coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you hold the excess of abortion with your hand or with a hook and incise.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not make an ultimate incision, rather in the region of the root, so that there is no efflux of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then heal it with the cure of wounds until it is healthy.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Moreover, born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrific womb of the mother until it fills that, and strongly it is similar to the partitions before according to the semblance of a snake (and for this reason some first appelants call it "malautia caudada"); therefore it is necessary that we incise thus like we incise abortion, and heal it until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the knee of the woman is not perforated, or the small passage.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to bad alignment which has preceded, and that is done or for flesh not well adjusted or for subtle or excessive effort.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is done in the belly of the mother, or in its ribs, or in the upper pulse of it, or in the lower pulse of it, and forbids from getting pregnant and from conceiving, and strongly forbids the menses.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the recognition of that is done by observation of the uterus, if the obstruction is apparent, it is foreseen; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the fingers or with the rule.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to subtle effort, and it is foreseen by the two lips, then you touch and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that which presses on the two pubic lips, and then you pause with the fingers indicating to amend both the more inward parts.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her thighs extended, and then you extend the two lips forward so that the subtle effort is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take an ointment and anoint the place with oil and pause that on the spot, and let it stay there for a day or two so that the spot does not become inflamed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the effort is great and excessive, then it is necessary that you inject that with a spatula or with a needle of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to fleshiness, then suspend that in an onion, and inject that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And here are the medicines that stop the flow of bloody wounds, such as achaetia, and dragon's blood, and others, adjusted to the white album of urine.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide plaster of lead so that the wound does not become consolidated too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold that for several days and administer lukewarm water to the sick person.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is cured with another treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some old wise men fell into the native birth of other flesh, and then it is necessary that you inject according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for cancerous aposteme, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the belly not made contradictory with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 23.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that falls into the knee of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins into which those flow continuously with blood; and how ancient hemorrhoids are and they are made tails.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus about those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the belly of the mother and do not appear to the sense, then in those there is no cure made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the orifice of the mother above which one feels sensation, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the tail to the forks, or to the rough sheets, and inject those into the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those from which the flow of blood of one of the powders injected into the wounds stops, thus with cassia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soften the soles of the feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a mixture of sumac and scorched millet and walnuts and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of barley and cook that with honey and wine and make an ointment on the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is absorbed, well and good; and if not, make adhere to two ventoses, and to the nipples with scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take an ointment and submerge it in the juice of colyander or the juice of arnaglaza or the juice of guarrievier with wine pentit, and make adhere to the spot; and then cure the spot with an unguent until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But the royal rule which is of rough observation, it is necessary that you inject that which appears to you according to what I have said in the royal engagement.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 24.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of accidental hernia in the belly.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of apostemes fall into the belly, such as cancer and lapident aposteme and ulcers and adherent and erpetromenes and fistulous hemorrhoids and raguaries and thyl and other apostemes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	You have already spoken of these diseases and their species, and their symptoms, and the cures for them in division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	I will cover how you should operate on the abscess in this treatise, because I saw many of these abscesses that collected healthy matter, and if you want to know how the operation of the iron is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then I will cover how you should consider if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion and fluctuation and fever, and sometimes it becomes red and swollen, and then you don't touch it with perforation, and cure it with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then I will cover how you should make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back with her feet adjusted to the partition below the belly, and her thighs spread out, and place her arms below her knees, and tie something with a ligament to what is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife will follow on the right side and administer the instrument in which the orifice of the matrix is opened, in the form of which you will find in those cases that will be done properly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And I will cover when you want to administer this instrument that you place in the radius of the matrix of the woman's womb, and what part of the instrument enters the matrix should not be more than the radius of the womb and leads to the disease.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the radius of the womb, then I will cover how you should place pads on the texture of the radius of the womb so that it prohibits the entrance of the whole instrument into the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And I will cover how you should place the vertex that corresponds to the instrument on the side, above, and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertex until it opens the orifice of the womb.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by hand and it is smooth and soft, then I will cover how you should succeed in removing the head of the womb with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the healthy matter is evacuated, then I will cover how you should place in the wound a membrane submerged in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some stipulation; and put the plaster on the section in the radius of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place a form before the womb and on the perineal wound a clean membrane submerged in water, in which there are swollen veins.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be cured, then two days with gentle touching that converges to what is convenient until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some vegetables are washed with the womb and the wound in such a way that they are crystallized in water and honey, and then in water where there is infused root of iris or long aristology, and then it returns to gentle touching.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deeply set in the wounded womb, then I will cover how you should be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, having care for what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to deliver babies that are badly positioned, which require medical treatment when they do not come out naturally according to figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary to cause the midwife to recognize in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expressing herself with pains below and desires to smell the air, and above that which is joined to her for what is on top, and hastens the issue of the baby, then you know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the issue of it upon the womb's head, and the second one is either suspended or pending from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see those signs, then I will cover how the belly of it should be comprehended so that the baby descends lightly, because when they are born upon the womb's head, they are given to them the second one, and it is freed from those superfluous things with good moderation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another part is not natural and not laudable, because when the baby is born on its feet and the body of it is born in front of its head and its feet, and its hand is one, or at its foot. or it is born with its head and its hand, or at its belly, and it is strongly converted upon the womb's neck, and it appears like the non-laudable figures of it.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I have shown you the whole figure of those, and which engine is in those so that it may be signified by what and stood upon what.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is born upon the womb's head by natural order, and it is vehement upon the woman and makes her part difficult, and sometimes its virtue is already debilitated, then make that seizure, or what women hold of it, and evaporates the conjunction of it with fenugrec powder and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the measuring rod between the fingers of the patient's hand, to feel whether there is moisture in it, or to check if there is humidity in their fingernail.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Press the woman's belly inward so that she can feel the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if she cannot feel it, then cover the woman's body with a poultice made from the mucilage of ptilli and fenugrec in cizami.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her to take a deep breath, and then exhale slowly with her mouth and nose, holding it for an hour, so that the fetus will turn and move about.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are not turned from the beginning, then cover them so that you can reduce them to facilitate birth little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if they do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and raise her feet above it, and then tilt the chair towards the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall during the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not yet turned and the fetus is dead, then cut into them and extract the remains of the fetus or pull out the body with your hand and extract it with equality, so that it will be turned around.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The examination of the embryo on the patient's feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is positioned on the patient's feet, then cover them with it, and then turn the fetus little by little, and then grasp it, and then take one of its feet and stretch it out little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are positioned between the thighs, then command her to push, and make her exert herself with difficulty, so that it will turn if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not turned in what we have recommended, then return the fetus little by little into its natural position, so that it will then be easily examined.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited in all that we have recommended, then take a mucilage of alta and dissolved goma, and pound everything together in the mortar for good percussion, and then apply it to the womb of the woman, at the lower part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that mixture into a syrup with warm water, until you obtain the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts that have been separated from it are purified, then make for it a sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause it beneath it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have done the sub-fumigation for an hour, then place it on a chair, and make it turn and stretch out its mouth, and raise it from that, and press the lower part of its belly with gentle compression, so that the fetus will soon be turned.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examination of the fetus on the patient's teeth and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is positioned according to this method, then engage it by inserting its hands little by little; and the woman should be seated on a stool, and her feet should be raised above, and they should be supported on the bed, and complete the delivery of her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the belly of it little by little, and then extract what is left of its feet from the aurelhas until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not turned, then take its feet and make them move vigorously, and then press what is above the hypochondria little by little until the fetus can be born with the parts from above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert its hands and grasp the fetus little by little, and command the woman to push until the fetus is turned.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examination of the fetus latitudinally while suspended from one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be engaged in reduction of its mother's hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her go around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then place her on the bed, and shake her thighs with violent concussion, and then administer gentle treatments with the recommended mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth is coming, then place it on a chair, and study the reduction of the hand, and grasp the fetus according to its natural position, and make the woman turn and command her to push until it is turned.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examination of the fetus on the expanded chest with its hands and the surface of its mother's belly.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	That the midwife should hold the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, and that it will be facilitated.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is thus engaged, then place it on the womb of its mother, with what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command it to move little by little, and when you have done that, then place it on a chair and command it to be inclined over the right side, and then command it to be grasped; and make it turn with difficulty.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus lies on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the womb is horribly inflamed according to this method, consider it, and then you will insert your finger into it so that it may be evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you will insert that of the naval, so that it may not be retained and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then you will push the fetus towards the partitioned parts inside so that it pauses according to what is convenient, and tell the woman to compress herself with some wrapped cloths, and the surgeon will be outside, making a gentle effort, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that twins are rarely born alive, and some births are never seen three or four, but this is a strange and bitter end; but I know the natural causes, and it's not living.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, it is said that they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each of those umbilical cords. Some births are forced-getted away like a fetus for natural birth, and some are not-born-like-this away like an unnatural birth, and so have we recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult births of their deviated infantation and reach what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you will care for them like we have recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what makes it facilitated and subtlety, and I have delayed, and it is ingenious according to the entire figure according to what is prepared by the ingenious mind for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed in the womb one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have already verified that a woman aborts in the sixth, and another has totally formed ones, which causes faulty measurement of the glorious savages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that is covered by the science of the midwife because it strengthens her to that small part of what, and therefore operates on what I cover.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus in what we have said in the division of medicine and it's not before existed, and you are forced to use operative means on me, then it is seen that you consider if the woman is of healthy virtue and not among those accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is seen that the woman should be placed on a flat surface with her feet elevated two fingers, and her head inclined downwards and her thighs lifted.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister holds that of two parts or is tied to the flat surface so that the body of hers does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you will moisten the mouth of its womb with oils and honey and mucus of fenugreek and sesame, and other things.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucus, and then inserts her hand into the womb, and then seeks the place where the fingers will be in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to be born on the flat surface of the head, and then you place your fingers in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or beneath the beard, or in the armpit, or in the proper places of the ribs, or beneath the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	More, if the birth is on its feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is seen that you hold the finger on your right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand facilitated and place the finger in some of those places which we have said, until you arrive at the boyish cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and place in the application of another finger, or the third if it is necessary, so that it may be attracted equally, and not extended according to its rectitude solely.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And then you will have the entire part, so that the birth of it may be alleviated thus as it is done in teeth, for the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is seen in that which is between them that the extension may be mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it is seen that the midwife anoints her fingers with oil and inserts them expertly and revolves them in that which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers are permutated into the place where it was put outside; and do thus until the entire fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is injured from the other side, and it's not possible to reduce that due to its contraction, then it's necessary to envelop it with a bandage; and then extract it outward so that everything is forgotten, and insert it into the joint of the hand or in the hollow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it's necessary to make points on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetid humour is great, or it accumulates in the contraction, or it's in the head of the adjusted water, then it's necessary to introduce between the spinal vertebrae and separate the head and extract the water, or that which will be discovered by an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that is about to come.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the fetid humour has a great head by nature: then it's necessary to insert that into the algemat, or to take that with the alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is injured and contracted towards the scapula, then it's necessary to be opened inward so that the humidity which is in the chest is expelled.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it's not complicated, nor does it obey the contraction, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the evacuation of the belly is apostematous or is in the hydropic condition, then it's necessary to perforate that so that you can purge the humidity that is in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetid humour is above the six feet, then its attraction is lighter and its direction towards the mouth of the mother is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it's contracted towards the belly and chest, then it's necessary to extract that with a bandage which you will have enveloped over your hand, and open the belly and chest so that what is in them can flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are numb and turn to the head, then the metrona inserts into the left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is opened, then insert the hand into the preon of the liver, and seek with that the head, and attract it towards the spinal vertebrae into the mouth of the mother, and then insert into it one or two inches, and attract it to those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is contracted due to apostema, because it accumulates towards the liver, then it's necessary not to trouble it; instead it's necessary to administer an effusion of humid and greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply emplasters; and follow the patient in waters that mollify and humect.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetid humour is above the sixth rib, then if possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the fetid humour treatment.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be inserted in poultices, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it's necessary that you don't leave any secondary cause hidden.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of apostemas caused by the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if it accumulates a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead fetus, and then on that focus another pregnant womb, and then a dead fetus is another fetid humour.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to him for a long time an apostema in the seventh womb; and it inflates until the focus becomes inflated, and begins to make a broken branch.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his cure, and I treated him for a long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I paused over him about some hidden causes of strong attraction, and I extracted from him one bone, and then I passed some journeys, and I extracted another bone; and I was too marvelously surprised, as if there were no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I understood the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existed in the seven thousand disposed milieux, and I saw her in such a manner for a long time, corrected by one small branch.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I didn't find it strange, but rather that in this there is science and help to what the artificial hand on my hand for cure administration.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetid humour.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a vertex in which the mother is opened.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher on which the books are bound, to which binding two vertices are in two extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But the emperor commands that this vertex be made more subtle than the stretcher, and it be done of ebony or of boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And it is the width of each wood that two fingers and a margin of each hand are one finger, and the length of each is one palm and half; and in the middle of two woods there are two adjustments of those same woods which were fixed, from which the length is the measure of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And you should also administer two additional medications through the mouth of the mother so that it is opened when you turn to those prescribed virtuous powers.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form appears similar to that subtle and more transparent:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of wood or boxwood, according to the similarity of strength.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Moreover, in the extremity of it there are two additional thus cum times, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother, then you make the woman sit on a sheet with her feet pendant, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then place your hand on the instrument thus with forced fingers according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation from the mouth of the mother, until it makes a measurement so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way to administer virtue which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impulse in which the fetus is impelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of ami sdation in which the head is countered greatly
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with a forceps to which the teeth are attached in the extremity, thus at times, and some veins are made long thus as forceps according to this form, thus at times, to which the teeth are attached thus as teeth of rescue in which it is incised and countered.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of ami sedation few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which the teeth of wax are attached, in which the head of the fetus is countered:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities at which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when they are multiplied the species of that and are prepared by the artisans, as it is clearer in their operation and more suited to the men for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you do not work with those instruments already seen as it should be, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction from the secondine.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the secondine is retained by the enfantament, then you command the patient to retain the sieve above, and then make that stornudar in condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of it and over its nostrils, and if for thus it is deformed exit, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And then, you take a wand and perforate in the cover a hole and pause on that herb opening the mouth of the mother, thus as calm and rough and anet and chamomile and scicados arabic and cassia lignea and santal.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of their kind are submerged in water in the wand, and pause that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then pause a cane tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold that until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that stornudar thus as I have said, and the secondine will be forgotten with velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Moreover if the treatment is not successful, then you command the matrona to submerge her left hand in oil of sizami or in mixture of altea, and then insert that into the jug and scratch it with that secondine, and when you have found the auras, then take it out and extend it little by little. If it is annexed in the womb of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the secondine, extract it little by little according to rectitude so that the mother does not fall into vehement attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Beforehand, it is permitted to move the right and left ribs to facilitate.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust in the quantity of attraction, because it will obey and evaporate from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have not recommended the treatment with sturnutation and medication of the wand with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	Moreover if it is not forgotten among all the causes which we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue about that in iteration of abstraction, moreover beforehand it is clear that what is ejected from it into the mouth of the mother lies in the space of the woman, and then crystallize that in enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it dissolve in some days and will be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Moreover when they are purified, it is of the elevated bad odor at the head, and at the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then it is clear that they have been administered under-fumigations and conveniences to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Moreover some of the Ancients already experienced under-fumigation of nitwort and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument in which the woman is under-fumigated for the retention of menses and of the secondine:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be done by sight or by art.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle extremity should be placed in the jug and the ample extremity over the focus, and the sub-fumigation should be placed over the arms of the focus.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that within so that the sub-fumigation is consumed and then another is added afterwards.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Treatment of the unbroken skin of an infant's buttock.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many infants have soft and unbroken skin on their buttocks, which has a subtle and open pores.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then advise the midwife to pierce the skin of that finger; and if not, pierce the thin spatula, and beware not to touch the tender part.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place it on the woolen cloth infused with wine and oil; and take care that the wound is cleansed from within so that it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it will open, then place a caneula in the wound for many days, and wait until the infant is strong enough to turn.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And thus you will achieve closure of the wound by consolidation of the plague or abscess; then advise that this consolidation be incised, and take care to treat it with what we have said about treatment and poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur below in the lower part produce a low and thick pus, which are those that occur near the buttock or in the space of one party.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that pus is old and corrupted by the putrid white or subtle humidity, and some vegetables are drawn from these fistulas, some penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating ones are known by what is exited from them through the outlet and through flatulence; and some want to use the badness of outlet, and often it is exited from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas are vegetables in the penetrating space within the bladder, and within the meat of the penis; and some of those penetrating ones into the joint of the thigh and into the node of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which the penetrating fistula is known, entering into the buttock and not-penetrating, it is that you put your finger inside the buttock, and you will feel a subtle thread of iron or of copper in the fistula when it is not turbulent.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if it is turbulent, then insert into that subtle thread of lead or horsehair until you feel the thread or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all and there is no progression of the wound or any cause of evacuation or worm or flatulence, thus as we have said, then you will know that it is non-penetrating, and then you should proceed to treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the penis, then the sign of it is the excretion of urine from that and prohibition from that place where medicine should be consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the thread passes within here if it is not turbulent within the bone, and there is pain in the circuit of the party; and that from it comes putridity at times; and that it does not work in this medication, nor is it consolidated with pus.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the treatment of them is troublesome and vain effort by doctors over which they are fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing occurs with iron spear according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been said and proposed.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the badness goes between your hands over the two fingers and lifts the legs of him upwards, the thighs are inclined towards his belly, and then insert a thread of lead, or of iron if it is in the turbulent fistula, until you know the place where the thread passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels the badness around the neck, then advise that you insert your finger inside the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger the thread that has already been discovered to penetrate, or what you feel between your finger and that sip or flesh, then you will know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not trouble yourself about it, because it is not in that healing, thus as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But perhaps some doctors say that it is healthy in some households to be bitter.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And from the medication for which you are hoping for youthfulness in him is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, thus as it has been preceded, and insert it into the fistula until it penetrates around the neck; and then wait two or three weeks until you know that all those adjusted flesh wounds have been closed, which seem like the downy plumage of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then take care to heal those wounds wrapped in bandages until all those adjusted flesh wounds are closed, and then take care to heal with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tension enters, and does not penetrate into the thigh where it is in the rectum, and between that and the tension which is a vein of flesh or of cartilage, and sometimes the fistula in what is on the surface of the codena, then you dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if you can dry the tension, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where it affects the extremity of the tension, and for the tension is liberated and freed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated wounds which are assembled at the canal of painful urine and do not break open any of those causes.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Perhaps the flow of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you are dissecting those wounds, then the thousand times it is of the pus, the lighter instrument is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts well to habitual practices: so it is an adjustment of those adjusted wounds, and an abscission of the blood's excessive exudation from the humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then heal those wrapped ulcers in bandage or in causes of thrice-pressed entrails until the location gets a brace, and then heal the plague with a hardening, engendering and consolidating flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines are those which are stimulating and excessive; when then it is restored, it is already healed and does not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	Perhaps the fistula has already penetrated into the groin of the rectum and is elongated from the surface of the body, then you will insert the thigh into the rectum and investigate in that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And then if you hold the tension and between you and it is a vein of cartilage or flesh, and it is propitious for penetration, then there is no operation on it unless by way of confidence and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in one of three ways: either to cauterize that thus as we have said; or to dry it until you achieve the conquest of its cavity so that it is possible for you to enter into the veins and the propitious cure; and do not process more than the drying per so that no incision is made on the containing vessel, and that it ascends above the patient's essence with a well-willed gesture; or to elongate that vein and extract that pus which dries into the rectum, thus as we have said, or with a pointed instrument of acute extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated wounds which are in the drying into one pore for encrustation; and then strive to make the restoration of all the plague in the drying, and if the atrocious pus above is not consolidated, and the herniated fistula breaks open at the part of the rectum, and it will be lighter for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And the fistulas are finished according to this method: it is when you insert the tension into the fistula, and it is in the depth of the rectum around the surface of the body at the codena and at the margin of the rectum, then take the tension of perforated extremity, which is thus like a needle preparing the vessels according to this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert into that veined wrapping of five veins or around those; and then insert the tension into the vein in the fistula until you achieve the conquest of its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Perhaps it penetrates into the margin of the rectum properly dentated, then you extract the vein from that troubled place thus that you insert the thigh into the rectum; and extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and stretch each one, and leave it for a day or for two, and when perhaps you incise the vein in the flesh, stretch well until those flesh are incised which are between the two extremities of the vein and that fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then heal the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Perhaps the atrocious fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you are prepared, but not much in the groin, because it is not for you to do that so as not to incise the vessel; and then make it enter until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spine-like spatulum is what has been found for the fistula: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that it does not incise anything that is not necessary, thus sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of stitching of hemorrhoids in which the blood flows into the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are thus according to two methods, because either they are between the rectum resembling thus that it is of carbon, or those are like a layer of rough skin.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those are small and large, and the blood flows from those sometimes and it is one, and thus many, and thus outside the rectum, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Perhaps those that are outside the rectum are thus according to the measures of little humidity, from which flow yellowish water or a small amount of blood with continuous flux, and thus according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is dentated in the rectum is that you command the patient to sit and to exert themselves until the rectum becomes dry and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take hold of them and suspend them in air with an uncle or have someone hold your finger, and then insert the veins into their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Perhaps the uncles are not held by them due to the humidity and softening of them, then take them in dry, rough or woolen cloths, and extract them into the tender threads, and then insert them and powder over their hollow cavities with powders blown onto them for cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is written in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal them with another cure until they are completely healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the evacuation, then insert the suppository into the anus in the place where it is most constricted, and wash it with that water which is in the vessel and which helps to evacuate more easily when the patient strains.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	Perhaps the hemorrhoids are before the anus, then the cause of them is easier, and it is that you take them with your finger, or take them with an uncle, and insert them, and then heal them with water which we have said until they are completely healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And in the one who has an incision, you should administer sutures according to this method: take a thread enveloped and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the above parts, and make it penetrate through the needle into the root of the other part, and envelop the two extreme ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then cut the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And make a totality of them, and let one of them be the one that does not hurt, so that the superfluity of the blood flow runs from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then pause on the anus, wrapped in oil or cerate; and place it on the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let that be until it forms a scab; and when it falls off, heal them with an unguent or another cure until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Soft words given hastily for the excision of a wound or for the constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are antiquated and of no value in that medicine, then it is necessary to remove them from the point of the spatula or with your finger until they are humid and held back by the escar, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove them with a vigorous scraping because the first intention is to let the blood flow and they are excavated; and then heal them until they are completely healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the cure of gout, that is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that gout, that is clear, and it's not if you don't notice the redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of garlic, and it is made in the whole body and mainly in the parts below the feet and fingers, and it ends for those who have the annoyance.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary that it be incised where it is in the course of the vein, and held with forceps or an uncle, and eradicated from its root; and then heal it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second thing that is written in the following chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Perhaps a wart is a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and many soft words come from the mouths of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure of it is to extend and insert it, or to strengthen it with a thread or a hair until it forms a scab.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already eradicated are the inward and outward ones with the instrument which you will direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Perhaps a mole is a small, rough, or fistulous growth on the surface of the body near the knee, and when it breaks out, it seems to be in the likeness of the formation of a mole, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure of it is to take a needle of hawk's beak or vulture's beak, and make it strong, and place it on the mole until it contains the circle of the needle around the parts of it; and then revolve your hand with the needle until you insert what is in the course of the mole, and pause it in the flesh of the skin, and eradicate the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make it with a needle of iron or of steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part below the needle should be subtle, solid (not perforated), enveloped so that above the said part the apprehension of it is abolished and the revolution of it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the mole according to what is previously said in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauterizing.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of instruments that are administered to give comfort.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some comforters are made of silver or copper or tin foundry or alloyed; and some comforters are made of those small and large instruments according to what is administered, because that which is administered for the care of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are fragile or delicate, the comforters of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few comforters:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the tube that is below, in which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this method; and it should be distinct at the point where the bag is tied, like many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the tube that is inserted into the anus, which is smooth (not rough) like a lion, subtly introducing; and on one side of the tube there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the size of the roots and the anus, even if it's small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin are placed, and its length should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be pierced for many channels, just as it is revolving; and if the space that is between the channels is large enough for the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude thread which is of ten threads, or around them; and adjust it to the bag; and when it is placed in it, let it be tightened at the top of the comforter between two distinct constrictions, and then comfortize each channel: The quality of comforting is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then let the patient be placed on their back, and elevate their legs up high and place one cord above them on which there are holes or a lancet; and apply the extremity of the cautery with oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then insert that into the anus to facilitate, and let the minister take the bag and extract it twice or three times with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine as much as is in the comforter; and then remove the comforter and the patient raises their legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces out that evacuation, hold it as much as you can; and if he sleeps for an entire night, it is better to delay the treatment.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	Better if you comfort them in the illnesses of solution of belly and evacuation of the intestine, then you iterate the cautery until it is healthy.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses, then let the comforter be subtle and gentle, among the comforters which children are usually comforted with.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is convenient to the book, and I will say thus the treatment of those with mother and medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what and where they are made, and according to the location on which they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why many wounds are made thus are from getting hurt by a stone, or incision of space, or cutting with a knife, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with an arrow, or similar to those many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Better the wounds that are on the parts of the body thus are from a wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thighs, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some wounds because it pauses that reasoning and rule about the other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance of the composed chapters will come to the beginning of the third capital chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when there is a simple head wound and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's from getting hurt by a stone or similar, and already has wounded the scalp so much alone and it's a great wound and fears about that patient having an abscessed apostema, then you should quickly treat the cephalic wound, and don't delay; and extract from the blood according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there is no prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is extracted from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let there be phlebotomy of the contrary part of the wounded area; and beware of the patient's relapse and of vicious and gross vices.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Better if from the minute you prohibit some cause, then let it be diminished of the vice and not approach to flesh nor to vice.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the wound, if it has abscessed apostema, cut into oil rose solutives or in wine in which it is stipulated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	More often it is certain to make an incision on the affected area, then pause over the wound, if it has recently bled and the air has not yet changed the powder that you will recommend applying little by little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then pause on the healing wounds until they are healthy.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	More often if the wound is large or is due to a spacious and similar incision, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust them with a suture according to what you recommend for their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	More often if the wound has exposed bone and flesh, and it is not retained by them except for a small suspensor, then incise there and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of cartilage, and command the patient to abstain from nourishment in which there is grossness: cabbage and fermented foods are similar to their composition, until they are well-compounded.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find decay and rot in the cartilage and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that rottenness and remove it, and treat it properly.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	More often if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which flows a lot of blood that can be harmful, and it is not absolved by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find it unincised, then you incise it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if necessary, you provoke what we have said does not concur, then you cauterize until the blood is absolved.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; indeed you dust over those wounds with that powder, because consolidated, so that the air does not change them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of iris one part, dragon's blood two parts, and extinct earth three parts; let it all be well-triturated and crumbled, and fill the wound with it, and let it be constricted by a good bandage until it stays on that affected area, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And you strengthen it from beneath with pillows and lift it up, and do not disturb it while it is like that, because it is not incised, for it is not eradicated by the medicine until it is healthy.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes it happens that this alone is sufficient, when you do not have iris and dragon's blood present.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this medical operation is suitable for large wounds when it is convenient to pause over them and they are stretched, and the recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is summer time, then you do not attend to the position of this powder, but rather take care of those wounds with what we have said, indeed you pause over those healing wounds with digestive powders, or you pause over those poultices made from flour of ordinary bread with water and honey until they get purulent; and you treat them with another cure until they are healthy.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	More often if it happens to the wound fractured in bone, and it is small, then you extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And you will direct the cure of fractures of the head in what is coming next.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	More often if the wound happens on the neck, then it is not in difference in medication, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	More often if the nerves of the neck are incised or arteries, then if they are nerves, it is not in their origin but rather evaded cure with what makes vehement stipulation, indeed as we have said and written that it is veterinary and similar to their composition, because it does not harm the nerves and contradicts that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And you do not pause over the wound for any total cause of complete numbness, because the substance of the nerves is numb and their continuity with it is in the brain, which is the pus that is above all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is that which is cured by gentle medicines, indeed as it is caused by washing with double water, some veiled infusion in rose oil or non-rose oil, and thyme when it is washed with double water and the other minor pains are diminished according to this manner, and healing humors.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	More often if the wound is large, then administer suture, or bind the lips of it, and treat it with pillows until it is healthy.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	More often if the wound is deep or happens to it at the lowest part of the pus, then you pierce that in the place most pressed upon.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	More often if in the wound an artery is incised and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke what we have said.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	More often if you have incised the vertebrae of the throat or all, and thus saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the cartilage with a suture on the cane of the throat and do not touch that; afterwards equalize it and reduce it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with decent structure, and lift it up for some days; and treat it with healing humors in which there is stipulation and excitement until it is healthy.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	When the plague is in the bone and makes an impression, then perceive it thus, and if there are fragments of it in him, extract all that you can from there; and what you have not perceived, let it enter into the part where the plague will be relieved, and separate it from the severity of his pain.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then dust over that area with the powder which you have recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the plague is a festering wound, then cure it with that water of which the remedy will come to you in the seventh chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the sores of the neck or of similar ones that are made between the spine and are made in the scapula or in the cotyle or in the lance or in similar ones.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of the lance or of the cotyle, and you measure its depth, then consider that if the plague has reached the vitals when the patient's condition worsens; then know that the plague is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the plague is recent in the seventh vein, then you pause at the first hour's powder, and do not strenuous that which is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and alleviates the patient, rather pause on the attractive retention, and remove those two veins a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the retention is not present to you, then pause at the orifice of the plague, which is very close so that it sucks out what is of the humors; and make that the patient sleeps on the plague so that it flows out what is in him, adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the plague has passed three days or more and does not affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart nor constriction of wings, and he has good other dispositions, then know that the plague is saved; and therefore cure it with warm baths and another entire cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of it is excessive, and already all time is opened, then know that already a festering wound has been made; therefore cure it according to the seventh chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is from incision of the scapula or of the cotyle, and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure it with water that is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has made an impression in the bone, and its roots are fixed, then twist the plague and gather to extract those roots, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then let them enter so that the plague will be relieved, for their extraction from there is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plagues that occur in the other limbs, the juvenation in cure is the juvenation of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that affects the belly is either great, or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Some great evacuations come from the intestine or nerves of the intestine, because it is made an introjection of them and their suture must be more vigorous and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of their introjection at the seventh place, because it will be opened and becomes gross due to the instrument of it being made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the moderate disruption is better, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that convene in sutures of the other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures communicate with the other plagues, but above all there are own proper ones in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Then I say that when the plague is small and there is some cause of the intestine for that, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has received inflammation from the frigidity of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when it is so, then it is necessary that you scale it thus, that you submerge a sponge or cloth humid in warm water alone, or that you cook in water squinant, and cypress, and spice, and embrocations with that in the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some evacuations make it go in which has been stipulated, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is taken altaea and malvas, because by that the instrument of it is alleviated with few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the instrument of it is excused near this cure, then you separate the disruption a little with an instrument in which they are inserted to make morrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary cure is better, when it is properly administered so that it does not become tedious, and there is no occupation to hinder its necessity and failure.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, thus you will see the shape of it:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp-edged knife, and the other not-acute, and the subtle extremity, and it should not be in the subtlety of the spatula, unless it is obtained with a few.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And then when the plague is amplified and goes outside the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction follows the form of its natural location, in its own proper place, if possible, because better is.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	However when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs thus higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place their head thus higher than their chest, and the parts below.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you place your attention and consideration always on this, so that the part where the plague is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is necessary that you administer this in severe plagues and in mild plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, place this that is prepared for you, and make it so that the minister is among your most skilled hands, which holds the disruption whole in its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and uncover from that to him who knows the suture of some other cause.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and then you release the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and stretch the needle once, without putting faith in the two extremities of the cord, as two extremities of the ciphac which is below the cord of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added the two extremities of the cord and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so you form four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then you stretch with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some divisions of two parts together, and then add the two lips to the plague for decent addition; and then you release the thickness of the finger and fix another needle there, and then you tie it with double faith as if it were the primary needle; and do not cease doing this if it is necessary among the needles until you complete the entire contraction of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And thus the mild needles are between roughness and subtlety, because the subtle needles more lightly pierce the flesh; and the large ones are difficult to insert into the cord, and therefore it is necessary that they be mild in subtlety and roughness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed in two extremities of the cord properly, so that the flesh is not lightly pierced and the plague is healed before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And there should not be prolonged sutures because the plague should not be prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then you insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not let the patient turn over to their own dormier; and you place above the suture puffs expanded from the entire part, which hold the extremities of the needles; and then you release them until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of suture with needles are in this manner more convenient in small plagues, because they have need of a suture with one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	However the second suture is communal: and it is that you administer a suture with four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, in one way, with a needle in which faith is enveloped in subtlety and roughness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, you return the needle to that same part of the cord from which it began, so that the faith retracts from the most sublime part to the plague, so that the suture is according to the suture of a drawstring in which the strings are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture I have seen the plague that was affecting a man in his belly which had been plagued by a contusion, and it was the disruption of the largest plague of one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the intestine of my middle place and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have reduced that deposit which the intestine had been without the plague for 23 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured it and it is healthy; and then I visited him for many years, and it is converted into its dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors have judged that it was not a curable illness; and by miraculous chance, because you did not cure that patient, because it was in a place where the patient was not touched by any medicine, but instead I put many doses of warm water on the affected area every day and diligently gave him honey mixed with melon water until he was cured.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Perhaps you did not direct two special types of sutures properly, according to the narrative of Pareula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the groin, and you insert a needle from the front part to the back part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then as the needle penetrates into the groin and in that same moment it goes straight according to rectitude and length of the whole body, and there is the extremity of the sciatic nerve where you inserted the needle; and make it penetrate from one extremity to the other, from the back part to the front part, in the other extremity of the thigh.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then as you have made that penetrate, then make it penetrate another way in the same extremity of the thigh from the back part to the front part; and there is the extremity of the sciatic nerve which is in this region, and make the needle penetrate from one extremity to the other, from the back part to the front part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate also your penetration, which you make penetrate into the sciatic nerve in the extremity of the thigh, which is inside the patient's body until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this same moment to extract that which is in the extremity of the sciatic nerve on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the groin which penetrated, and then return it to its place in the groin and body of the sciatic nerve which is on the other side of this extremity of the thigh; and withdraw that from the groin which belongs to the patient.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make it one way and another, and make it one way and then another way until you collect all that which is beforehand according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you collect a suture of pellicles in which you gather the skin, so that you collect the sciatic nerve one way from the part of the extremity of the groin, and then leave another way until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Perhaps the second special type of suture proper, which is said by Gualia, and this is from the serum of the patient and recommended for him, it is that you collect according to similarity in which you gather medicinal alchemy, so that they add all the part to its comparable part in the convenient nature; and apply the extremity of one to the extremity of the thigh and the other extremity, and this is done according to what you have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	That you fix the needle in the extremity of the thigh at your proper distance from the back part, and make it penetrate to the front part in that sole, and leave two extremities of the sciatic nerve; and then revolve the needle and make it penetrate from the back to the front in two extremities of the sciatic nerve.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then revolve those circles, and make them penetrate certain parts from the front to the back in two extremities of the thigh other than those which are on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suturing is better than the common ligature, and it is a suture of which I previously mentioned in remembrance.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the serum of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And perhaps the dissector says that a suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert in these a few threads, and begin with an introduction of the needle from what belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who gather the hollowed-out bodies.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when disruption is in the middle location of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other locations of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	Perhaps the judgment of medicinal treatment of plague is a judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which cause is because when you consider the recent plague with the holy saint beforehand, that the air alters it, and reduces the intestine and gathers it and adapts it decently, then pause over that incarnative powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over those gathered threads which are present in you, until they make hard skin and cut the fibers, and consolidate sciatic nerve and thigh; and then cure it thus as is the cure of other plagues, until it is healthy.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	Perhaps if you do not have the medicines, then pause over that much, because it begins to gather arm, warm water, and exchange those two doses a day, thus as you and teach, until it is healthy, because you do not need another medicine in many dispositional cases when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Perhaps if you fear that the plague communicates to the principal members, then it is good that you submerge the woolen thread in oil of tempered quality, or in rose oil, and pause it in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and joints.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, because many veins are obstructed, then one should create a crucible with a black stipple application, and mostly if the purging is performed in the intestine and it is a penetrating external exit into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You know that the one from the large intestine is of a more languid sanity than the one in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult sanity because the intestine, which is called "gégénou" does not receive sanity from the plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and to its magnitude, and to the subtlety of its body, and to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Perhaps what proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and consequently that recent thing reduces it according to your direct nature in which you reduce the intestines in a gathered way.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Perhaps it has passed into the space and already made a green or black vein, then you stretch that faithful hand over the area that is denied of it, so that blood flows from the fabric, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then you insert that which is another ligament, and pause the two extremities of the faithful hand pending the departure from the plague below it, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it from the fabric's emission and release of the arm from the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they accumulate in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption accumulates in the intestine and is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some homes, because thus you see that which was plagued in the seven winds of the belly with percussion of the lancet and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its gestation and ventosity.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore you will pursue the cure of it already, because it was not confused in its sanity, maybe you will continue to subtle it from within, so that it may be sanctified and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you will see that the place is already consolidated, then you should think about the patient who suffers from the bad accident in the seven winds of the belly; and do not suffer for that bad accident and roam in their thousand disposed and mangling ways, and then enter in a bath and it is exercised in its digits.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And you will discover some experienced experiments that when an intestine suffers from plague, and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take firm grasps of large heads; and then adjust the two labial lips of the plague and pause a grasp of those that have the open mouth over the two labial lips of the plague; therefore when you take hold of them and stretch your mouth, it detaches the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then pause another grasp for the first time, and do not cease from doing so until you make grasps one by one according to the quantity of all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return it and thus the plague; and reunite those attached heads in the intestine until the intestine is sanctified; and do not accumulate bad nonuments to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is tied with faithful subtlety which is made from the intestine of annexed beast, because it is mixed in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these intestines, and it is not descarnated, and then tie the extremity of it to the faithful one, enveloped, and then enter that faithful one into needles and thus into that intestine, and return it to the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suture with grasps is not but according to the way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Perhaps the plague is great and wide, mostly if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not but subtlety, and there is no sanity of it at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of ulceration and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that all plague and aposteme when they become inflamed and ancient, it is made ulcer, and it is not consolidated and gets worse over time and does not detach, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is named fistula and we call it that azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a painful, hard, white node in which there is no pain and it is conquered thus as it is conquered by the penalty of anguish; and therefore it is named that calculus, that is, penalty.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some humid homes, which gets worse; and strongly the humidity is detached at some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some veins affected by this humidity are moved, and it is few, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already stated it in the division, then when you said those plagues, that all ulcer that is not sanctified nor is it in the naked flesh, it is not but for one of these causes: either because of few blood in the body; or because of its malice; or because between it and the labial flesh there is hard, prohibited carnation; or because it is of moved leg; or because that ulcer in itself meets the material that is of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient in its cure; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or because of the property of the region thus as it happens in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of maladies occurs, and it is delayed in that sanctification of aposteme by nature; or because there is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and the cure of their loves with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus you will know how to cure a fistula, which is made by way of operation with hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you will know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for some of them are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the diaphragm, or the intestine, or the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to any of the spinal vertebrae, or to any of the composite joints made up of the hand and foot; and from those that give proximity to the principal member and its semblance.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore those of these fistulas that are according to this manner are among the difficult-to-cure diseases, and do not receive a cure, and occupation with them is trouble and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the deep-seated fistulas that does not penetrate to those places that I have said, and you hope and confide in its cure, and want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with fire, and if the fistula goes according to rectitude, and you will acquire that in him.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a subtle point of lead, because lead in the levity of the sick body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has very horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify upon him with a point.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then crystallize the horrific orifice for its own horrific orifices, because the humidity through which you crystallize that goes away from the other horrific orifices and corrects their course.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and it is the conquest of the long-standing fistula or propinquity, or it is a fistula that has very horrific orifices and this is all about your total strength, in your introspection, in which you introspect the patient, and the invention of the pain away from your compression on the hand over the area, and semblance of the significations and accidental causes next to the aposteme.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And since you have stated all those causes in a true station, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long-standing from joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dissect the fistula according to what has been said about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the vein and of semblance, and cure it until it be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is according to rectitude, then you will know that you have inserted it into the preon as much as possible, and you will manifestly cleanse that of all its corrupt flesh; and you will administer certain enveloped medicines acutely, and introduce them into the conquest of the fistula, which has been comprehended in iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that which is some of the vigorous things introduced until the acute medicine corrodes all that which remains in the conquest of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with the juices that engender healthy flesh until it be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is away from you certified that, then you should inquire into it and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you should root out that until the corruption be totally removed; and then cure that which the flesh will take in to be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and throws out its arm as it used to do, then you will know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and then you will discover again with second thoughts and exquisitely make the reason of it and the mundification of it in the last fortified stronghold, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, good; and if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep-seated profundity of the body, which has not been achieved, and then you are not born to leave that alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to attract that, then you will attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and from those do not leave any cause in your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you have found a contrary cause of the humidities, and in their inception there is no fear nor error, then you will dissect those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause on the plague that you may worsen the plague, and let it enter where it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague being consolidated, and constrict the section which you have inserted in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Be careful, lest you fear, pause on the submerged bone above the triple olive oil, or the submerged bone in Egyptian angular vertebrae, or in the alcove of green angular vertebrae, because when you touch those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and those attractions are alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone similar to the bone of the chamber or thigh or resembling those, and that which of it is corrupted is the face of it so solitary, then remove that in resolution so solitary backward until the blackness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the plague.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and all that which has penetrated into the place where the corruption has pervaded, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you attend to someone who has experienced it in their thigh, so that they may pause on that and assist you with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of around thirty years, to whom pain occurred in his thigh, and from the wounded parts, the matter spread through the body until it reached the thigh, and it is a matter of apostema, a great apostema, and I do not think that there is an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I think that time is extended for the error of the doctors until the apostema is removed, and I correct the matter of the putrid materials, and its cure is then paused until the thigh is fistulated, and they are in the rotten words which all get purulent and humid matters of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors gathered around for two years, and I did not find any wisdom in them except in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the thigh of it and the matters that were corroding from it, those rotten words for a great body; and already the body of that man was totally stabilized and the color of it was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced a probe into one of those rotten words and penetrated the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed and scrutinized all the rotten words and tried to bring them to light from all parts of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and dissected around one of those rotten words until I discovered a part of the bone, and I extracted that corrupted thing, and it was already decayed and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupted a part of the thigh until it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I cleared away that which was discovered and prepared from the bone discovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I judged that it was not in the bone itself but that corruption which I had extracted and cleared away, and I had already demolished.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the plague with consolidated medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily upon the primary discovery, and I continued to find corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I cleared away that which appeared to me from that corruption, and then I did perforate to make the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered about the other side and did not cease to penetrate the small bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I penetrated around a palm of it, and that extract was from its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated and healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and its section unless for the disposal of its fragility and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it happens in all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncopy malady.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so it is healthy through entire sanitation, and nothing is in the place of hard flesh; and it is well done the disposal of it in its own body and returned its virtue to it; and it is converted into its own dispositions and did not do anything contrary to it in ambulation nor nuance in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already traumatized, then it is necessary that you dissect according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command it to extend to its own; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the primary ligament; and then bind it over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts below, and you discover the flesh above the place where you want to saw for fear of not sawing the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And stop putting a table under them decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to prevent the corrupted flesh from rotting.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover the small corrupted area little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the senses, and force the closure of the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not emerge, although it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you discover the entire flesh of all parts; and stop putting a table underneath, and stop covering that of the first part where the corruption enters until the closure of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the closure according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, then dissect that corrupted joint, and stop the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in the ingenium (or perhaps "in the engine" or "in the mechanism", but it's likely that "ingen" is an old word for a body part or a system).
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is very difficult; however, cover so that you inquire about the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you grasp it, and remove it according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and also in case your ingenium (or engine/system) can be rectified by you, when it does not cause you contrariety or nervousness.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what instruments are suitable and the closures to cut these bones are very subtle according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare all species of operation and convenient instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation depends on the species of instrument which you need; when you have great study and long experience and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, because then you have them for yourself to measure what is convenient for the instruments in all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will find in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will need, as I will simplify them as those that proceed to your prohibition which you will experience about the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of closure:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another closure:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another closure:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of a large other closure:
Forma de ray:	Form of a groove:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this groove is according to the form of a star-shaped claw head, and the points of it are according to the form of the points of an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not convenient unless you have that awl confricated with the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor for the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a wide razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another decently made closure: it is made with an arched curve of the iron below and the sharpness of the iron above, and the member of the iron of boys is decently made to puncture.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor similar to a lancet:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor which is used to cut the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this one is similar to a groove, and the extremity of it is like a closure, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a groove that is convenient for a ratio of that which is perforated through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly you know that all the causes that we have said about razors and incisors and closures.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	About the extremities of incision and the closure of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or because you have medicated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption worsens and goes to the member which is not perceived by any cause, then you know that you should incise that member until it reaches the place where the corruption is, so that the evil may evacuate through it, either by death or by major defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member becomes black until it is understood that fire has already consumed it, or it becomes blacker until the blackness reaches that member which is dead and takes all the body; and thus you know about the incision of that one.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	It seems that the cause of the corruption is a percussion of certain venomous causes, such as the sting of a scorpion or of a viper, or of rue.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you inject the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you inject at the root of the little finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the little finger of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you want to affect that, then inject into the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond and surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for the cure is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly if corruption affects the foot when it reaches the toe of the foot, then you inject into that up to one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then you inject into the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Maybe if it spreads to the knee, then you inject into the leg up to the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then it is not possible to cure it except by dismissal, and leaving the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way to inject into the limb or to sew it up is that you stretch the ligament in the part below where you want to inject, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament upwards; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until it is totally discovered; and then it is injected or sewn up.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And take care that it is placed far from the ligaments of all parts so that it does not touch the area, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and an abscess is cautiously avoided.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Maybe if there is a flow of blood when you operate, then you cauterize the area carefully, or stop it with some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected limb with a ligament at a convenient place, and cure it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his sick foot, this same accident which you and I have recommended, which is to burn the blackness in the sick foot with adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption happens primarily in the sick toe until it reaches the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for the cure, since he wants to remove the annoyance from the limb with the vehemence of that which takes away pain and distress, and injects into that foot up to the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, it happened to him that same corruption in the finger of the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and I have perfectly performed the percussion of that superfluity on the hand of the medicines, according to the mundification of the body; and it is not rebounded, the superfluity, until it begins to move into the other finger up to where it begins in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they asked me to inject the hand of his, and I did not want to do anything that would rebound on the percussion of that superfluity, and maybe I was afraid of the injection of the hand of his death, because the virtue of the patient was in danger.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he separated from me, he returned to his land and it happened to me that the man prepared and injected his entire hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration except to be a helper regarding what is said about this illness, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the care of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses occur in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of blood, and then it bursts and perforates, and the blood is drained from it, and remains in the place where it was as if it were a vessel, and the cord that is above it thus subsides, and it does not reach the last corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Maybe if the space is prolonged until the corruption penetrates into a member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you inject the entire cord thus as it is revolved, and mainly when it is subsided and made thin like a thread, and you ensure that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Maybe if you think that the cord adheres and that corruption has not achieved its last consequence, and in the cord it has passed from one side to the other, then you cure that man by cleansing.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	It is necessary to consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you hold is of fetid odor, then cleanse with Egyptian medicine, which is made from oil and vinegar and zinc oxide, receiving divided parts equally, and adjust them in a small vessel, and apply them over the focus until the medicine is fully absorbed and pervades to a specific melancholy.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take of the water that is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; and cleanse with that in the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that precious medicine; and do it for so many days until the sinus is purified and the putridity is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some burned ashes are cleansed with water of cinnamon, when it is not present to you at this medicine; and it is that you take the ash of vitriol, and mix it with the water; and then strain that and cleanse with it until you confirm that the sinus is fully opened.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not have tolerance to the Egyptian medicine or the water of cinnamon, then cleanse with the medicine in water and honey, which is mixed with zinc oxide, and cleanse with it in wine and honey, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleanses, and it makes the sinus adhere, and it increases when there is an excess of moisture and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do some burned ashes and confirm that the sinus is already cleaned, then cleanse with the medicine in water that makes the flesh of the leg tender.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take of the oily dyaphinicon and dissolve it in oil of rose and vinegar; or that you cleanse with those medicines and other oils that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on oils.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow where the cannula of the syringe is not received, then you amplify it by adding a little iron little by little, and pause in the warm water wrapped in Egyptian oil or in basilicon oil until it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you join the lips of the medicine with a suture and leave it for a quantity in which the syringe is introduced.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of it from which the arm flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the pus below the place where it is in the body so that the arm may flow until below, because when the arm is constricted at the entrance of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus until the environment of the pus below according to your will, then you should prepare the member with preparation for which the arm flows lightly according to what is apparent to you and that no cause of the arm is retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are placed over the sinus conveniently adapted to water that you want to extend those onto a cloth of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth is of such great quantity as it makes communication with all the sinus; and then insert the forked instruments into the right orifice of the sinus, making a wide passage for a little while; and then extend onto another cloth of linen with the oils of leons according to the quantity of the passage, and place it over that for a long position near the orifice of the sinus so that the evacuation of the arm is alleviated and no great cloth is needed except for some days a burned ash.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	That which is over the orifice of the sinus, which you clean in an entire hour so that you extract what is adjusted in the body of the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to know if what flows from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is placed over the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or it takes proper adhesion, then you may remove it on the third or tenth day, and when you remove the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the oil.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus is properly spaced, then no virus can subtly enter, then do not despair of the adhesion of it, because the healing of it is proper, because some homes are in those which delay the generation of flesh in the aforementioned plagues, and of those which make the contrary of it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus for many days is an undigested arm, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and it is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like Egyptian oil, when there is an adjusted excess of addition of zeigy.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last medicine which is curative, it is that you take of Egyptian oil and dissolve it in rose oil, and it is over the vial into which the anticyptic substance is added, and then confirm that with the body, and use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to be doing an action, when there is no arm, in a confined space, as much as it is possible to be gross, and use of it; or that you take mirra and aloen and enses, and trissa all and pulverize over the honey that is on the focus, and then draw lines over the drap and strengthen it over the sinus; and draw lines over the honey which has been confined so that it is gross, and pulverize over the drap and strengthen it over the sinus.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some vegetables should be administered in the long aristology and roots of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and flour of errors and centauria, and use of those simples or adjust them, trissa those and crumble and pulverize over the honey that has been recommended; and remove from it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the pruning of it, and make an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you heal with a fistular cure, thus as it is said below.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the cure of painful and worn-out nails and toenail incisions added to the division.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Painful nails are an abscess which grows beneath the nail of the finger or toe, and they grow in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less expected, or it is abscessed by a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and you should cut into it so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all, and it perverts its corruption to the bone within, so that it becomes fetid odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and the color of it becomes darkish.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And then when you have that which we have said in the division and it does not conform to your cure, then you should burn all the superfluous flesh that has grown from the nail and then cauterize the wound with fire, because cauterizing is not helpful in this way.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already comprehended the flesh at the divided parts, and they begin to putrefy and rot, then you should pause with subtle rays beneath the angle of the nail that touches the flesh, and impel it under and incise that flesh to facilitate, and pause over what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines that burn within so that it is totally removed; and then cure that which has been grossly affected until it is healthy.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then you should incise the bone itself and extract it, because no time is lost when the corrupted bone is in the body.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption go into the finger, then you should incise it in one of the nodes according to its remembrance, and then cure it until it is healthy.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail receives percussion or attrition, and receives in that violent pain, then you should begin to fleubotomize the patient, and then cut off the nail with a spatula-like instrument transversely from below upwards, and be careful that the cutting does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you cause more violent pain, and it will be the cause of the superfluous growth of the flesh in that place; and then cure that place where it ceases to hurt.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But this is adjusted, which is born in the hands of some men, because it is entirely flesh, and it is entirely in the bones, or it is entirely in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some nodes of the finger does not get worse, and that which is born in the joints is entirely bad.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are fleshy growths, the cutting is easier, and it is that you should incise them from their root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its abscess.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born on the fingers from the nodes, you should incise at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those convenient saws according to what, and then cure it until it is healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which accelerates the fingers among the worn-out joints or by birth of the man who is thus, or for consolidation of the wound or for combustion of fire, or for similarity, therefore you should cut off that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between the drapings of the swollen fingers with rose oil so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them, or pause between them a thin layer of lead until it is consolidated according to what is desired.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation accelerates in some fingers on the palm, then you should cut off that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforms to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the examination of ulcers, they are various.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Ulcers are various, and they are enveloped by thick, full superfluous melancholic humors which come from the members of the body, and their greatest influence is in the legs, and they are greatly influenced in the legs of travelers and workers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer purification of the body from black bile by evacuating strongly, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	There are two ways to cure them of iron ferrous: one is that the black blood is evacuated and its bad properties are removed, and the other way is that the vein is elevated and all the blood is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning of it is done in this way: at the beginning, apply a warm compress to the leg until the thick blood is resolved, which is purulent in the leg, and then stretch the patient's leg to the partition above the thigh, into the hollow of the knee, with one bandage, and then section the vein in one place, or two, or three, with ample sectioning, and then elevate the black blood from the bottom of the partition below the leg, upwards, until the quantity that you want is eliminated and which time you will have mastered, and which will tolerate the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then leave it, and command him to abstain from black bile-inducing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that does not harm the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them is done in this way: you who raise the patient's leg, if there are many pelles, and then place it on a bench and apply a warm compress to the leg until it becomes red and the veins are exuberant; or it should be exercised with strong exercise, if the bench is not at your present, until the member is scalified.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then section the codeina at the right of the vein for sectioning in the loin or in the back of the patient's knee, or in the lowest part of the patient's foot near the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then uncover the codeina with an unguent and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to the sense, and it is of the patient's appearance which sometimes declines into blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then as you evacuate and remove the codeina, you see that white humour which was formerly cordial.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place it below the radius until it is elevated and freed from the codeina, and suspend it with an unguent or ointment of lion's blood.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then section another section, and section that section for three days, and then excoriate the codeina from the partition below the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate it and insert it into the back section of the ankle, and then extract it and elevate it until it is eliminated through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do it until you extract it from the section that is above or outside of all the sections, until everything is eliminated; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then introduce a strong double-edged needle and tie it and extract it, or introduce below the radius and revolve your hand on all parts until it is gathered.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate it much and it will come over the patient through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all the humors are evacuated, then pause over the place of the plague and anoint it with violet oil and unguent, and cure it until it is healthy.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if life is constricted having twisted to the one that is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then you should confine yourself above all the twisting of it and the places of its enveloping, and then suspend it with an unguent until it elevates all.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware of your section that you do not insert the vein and that you do not plague it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Method of inserting into the one whose life is sectioned:
Forma de unci orp:	Method of anointing with ointment:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to be applied excessively, thus with the ointments neither of acute extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of great flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would insert the vein by its subtlety; having been in excessive grossness thus as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of veins of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs on cold and dry lands, thus like the Athenians in Arabic lands and in Indian lands, which are dry and arid with little tenderness, and in which there are no herbs or breezes.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And strongly rooted in other places of the body are the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gestation of it is by putrefaction that you see in the channel, thus venomous darts pierce the body, and generate serpents and worms and snakes born between the intestine and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the suspicion of its advent is from this vein that causes inflammation in the leg with vehement swelling; and then the place is evacuated; and then the vein is cleared of the humor from the place of that evacuation, which seems to reject a plant-like residue.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then it appears from there the extremity, then you will find that you are wrapped around a piece of lead weighing one drachm, up to two drachms, and not exceeding that, and let the lead be suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as the eyes of the afflicted area are affected by some cause beforehand, wrap it in lead and apply that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the motion is prolonged, then you inject a portion of it and wrap the remainder; and do not inject that which seems to be contrary until it is fully evacuated, because if you inject that, it contradicts and enters into the flesh, causing aposteme and putridity in the place and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is fully expelled from the back of it and nothing remains of it in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it is extracted in some men who are in their longevity of 5 palms and of toes, and already I have arrived at a point where I extract one of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is injected at the time of its medication, then introduce the radium into the tract of it and perforate that long tract in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medicines; and then cure it by curing apostemes.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And in this vein some times it has many roots, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its many horrific roots, and is extracted from each horrific root.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus cure it as we have said in the division and with that which has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	About the generation of worms under the skin, and it is called cattle disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some land as our cattle disease because it often occurs in the thighs and is a worm that is born between the intestine and the flesh, and goes throughout the entire body, weakening and debilitating, and shows itself by the sentiment of each member, from member to member, until it disrupts the intestine and exits.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by putrefaction of certain humors, thus causing worms and serpents and roundworms and ascarids to grow in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and reaches the head, and arrives at the whiteness, then strongly roots are born in it and enter and destroy the whiteness, and often occur many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not fail to use the ambulation and apparition of it according to the sentiment, and consequently it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with ligament and constriction, and then dry above it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is imbedded in the flesh and does not come out, then you pause with a cautery iron over the place until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it in the place, which corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Maybe you have seen that essence arrive at the whiteness of the head, then strengthen over the eyebrow with a strong structure, and dry above it, and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient use purifying medication to evacuate bad putrid humors, and guard against windy generations that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	About the section on nafer's disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is named in our land nafer, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and then it is spread from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And already I have seen that according to what I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to a sick woman in a village, and you discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since you stayed for an hour, you saw that inflammation go away thus as it was going down from there, but more lightly than it should be, thus if it were silver you would see it corroding from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I put myself in the pain of that place and fixed myself in the muscle, and then I stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I ran to the other body until I reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the entire body according to what you saw; and I was too marvelously surprised by the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And you have already seen that in the mirrors of your eyes, according to that manner, although you have seen many things that are changed from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	Perhaps it is not visible in the eyes, just as it is in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you do not think it is there unless it is for the reason that the woman was of vile blood and uncovered veins, and in this way the sentiment of changed temperament appears.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward curvature in those who are delicate and have a humid body with weakened veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you as we have said, then you should stretch over that and leave it lightly and slowly enter so that the constricted temperament is released, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Perhaps you have not seen those evil eyes, then you cure him by exciting the body and that which expels bad temperaments, and cleanse those foul pills of serpent-like and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to species, and according to the places of the body in which they fall, because their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave, and rough, so they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have astellas (possibly "wings" or "tips").
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the wounds in which they fall is according to two manners: because the principal members are concave, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, and veins, and their similars; and therefore when you cut into one of these members and appear to sense death, which causes you to recoil, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that arrow from those in which death sits in the major dispositions, and when you do not appear so bad, and the arrow is not embedded in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the symptoms of the wound is when you cut into the arrow, and it pierces the bone, and it sits on the siphac which is above the brain, because it causes vehement pain, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the eyes, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and the strength is absent and the voice is destroyed, and it sits on the place of the wound with humid white pus-like matter, and you see something similar to abscesses of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you appear to have these symptoms, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Perhaps the symptoms of the arrow when it pierces the heart are so near to the left breast, and you feel as if something is fixed in a hard cause, and not a fleeting cause; and therefore the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and the color of the wound is black, and there is a coldness of the extremities, and numbness, and syncopes; and therefore you know that death descends from all sides.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms when the arrow has wounded the lung are expectation of bloody spittle from the wound, and the veins that are near the neck are apostematized, and the color of the patient's complexion is changed, and he exhales a great deal of spirit, and demands attraction of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow is stuck in the peritoneum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes a great cry with vehement pain and suspense, and does not move all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow is stuck in the stomach, then therefore you see signs of the wound being accompanied by some indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is stuck in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, you see some fissure of the wound, or the web, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure by extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bladder, and it is obstructing the urine, and it causes some cause to the partitions beforehand, and therefore there is pain over the patient's body, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Perhaps the other members are like the face, neck, and gullet, and the shoulders and the adjacent ones, and the vertebrae of the back, and the fork, and the hip, and the leg, and their similars among the members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not touch a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And you recommend that to you who have seen the essence of these arrows, because they signify for that above the true cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	Which cause is, because in one house an arrow falls into the lacrimal duct of his eye in the radix of the nose, and you extract it from him to another part, leaving the gray humor of his eye, and he is healed, and does not affect the eye of the document.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And if you extract another arrow from a Jew's quiver, which was hidden in the gray area of the shoulder, then the eyelid would be swollen and then the arrow would have been completely concealed and not found until a small extremity stuck to the shoulder flesh, and it was a great arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, at Ferrileon where there were no golden ornaments.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	It is the fault of the Jew, and he did not have a bad accident on his shoulder.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And you extracted another arrow from a Christian man whose arm was pierced by an Arabic arrow, and it was the one with golden ornaments; and then you had inserted something between two guides over that, and it was submerged in his arm; and then you were subtle about that, and you carefully extracted it, and it healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And you extracted another arrow from a man whose stomach was pierced by it, and you thought he would die from that; and then, since he passed thirty days without any change in his condition, you inserted something over the arrow and engaged with it, and it healed, and it was not a bad accident for him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I saw a man in whom an arrow was stuck in his back, and the wound had consolidated over him, and since he received proper care for seven years, you removed the arrow from the root of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman in whom an arrow was stuck in her stomach, and the wound had consolidated inside her, and it did not change in her condition in reality, and the woman did not have any harm in some of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man in whom an arrow was stuck in his face and the wound had consolidated, and you removed the arrow, not causing much pain, and many signs seemed to indicate that.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And you extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes which was stuck in a hidden place near his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was completely concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called for the cure of him due to the removal of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you touched the wound of the arrow very gently; and then you inquired about that with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; but I felt it a little below the right aurelia, and then I suspected that this puncture was due to the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plastered the place where I had applied attractive and digestive remedies, convincing myself that the place would be purified for it to appear to me as the place of the arrow, so that it would succeed over that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it did not happen at the significant accident place that the arrow had reached that place; and you continued with the plaster over it for many days and no accident happened; and the wound consolidated meanwhile, and the badness of the excess of it was removed in many days until one day I felt the arrow inside my nose and recognized it to myself.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you applied acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it was opened, and with a tender touch I felt that, and touched the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the flesh.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjusted in the opening of the wound for that acute medicine until it appeared visibly to me the extremity of the arrow, and I spent my time on that for a period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then because the wound was amplified, and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I remained there, and did not obey the judgment, then you did not cease to subtly engineer and contrive about that in many ways of ingenuity, until one day you began to descend with forceps fashioned like teeth, according to what will be seen at the end of the chapter, until you extracted it; and then you restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and you restored it and the wound consolidated, and it healed entirely, and it did not remain in any condition.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And you recommended to yourself the quality of extracting certain arrows because it pauses the rule and significance over that which I have not said, since the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in narration nor do they comprehend it freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen know how to compare little about much; and it is present about what is absent; and they introduce a new operation and novel instrument, which descends from the external causes of the art when they are accidental.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore you say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they entered; or by contrast with the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is gone through the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location, and it is attracted and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the judgment of the hour in which it happens, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purulent, and its attraction and exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	It seems that the patient is stuck in you and does not obey your will, then leave that for some days and afterwards take it to a doctor's attention and move it on any day, and already it has been forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your will, then wait for some days, afterwards you should perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that entire affected part with subtle travel within so that the place is amplified by the arrow, and then extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the head's bone and has proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and it appears in the patient with those accidentz which you have said and told, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until the sick person can be equalized for some days; because if the arrow reaches the ciphac, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck but only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the ciphac, and the patient remains for some days, and no accidentz happen to him from those causes, then you will engage in the attraction of the arrow and in the attraction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps if it is not stuck and does not obey your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow thus as we have recommended, and then take care to heal the place until it is healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Perhaps if the arrow is already embedded in the body's location, and it is embedded with sentiment, then you inquire about that in tenta, and if you feel that, then aim at that with some instruments which are convenient for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the instrument, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you feel upon the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the aurelhas which are held, then you deliver the flesh in which it is stuck from entire affected part to the very end that you may do; and ingeniate upon that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in twisting of those until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then you use your hand with forceps on all affected parts until it makes that obey; and subtly use a subtle delicacy so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on that at your time, then leave it for some days until the parts that are in its circuit can be restored, and afterwards take it out because then it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Perhaps if you have made a contrary flow of blood, then you administer that which we have said about the cure in the sick head chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And beware of your vertebrae of inscizio of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer ingeniously in all manner possible for the evasion of the arrow; and make that facilitated and tranquil and tardy and firm thus as you have and I recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus you make counter-pressure on the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you find the case of the arrow in him, because it may be more juvenile.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Perhaps if that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Perhaps the arrows that are forgotten by the counter of the other part, or that already proceed to some part from outside, or have made the extrication of the arrow by sentiment of the part above the codena propdana and times that eminent; then you see about that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then aim at that, because it is made lighter for the will.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Perhaps if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to counter-pressure until the arrow emerges from the bone, and amplify so that it meets, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for some days, and then try again until you succeed.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you impel it with him.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Perhaps if the shaft is fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, instrument concavely so that it enters the concavity of him in the hollow of the arrow and then impel it with him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Perhaps if the arrow is concave, then you impel it with a strong instrument entering into that, because the arrow is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is intoxicated, then wait for you to concave all the flesh in which it is, if that is possible for you, and then take care of that with what is convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow is caught in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is close to you touching that with the tent, and it is possible for you to see about that, then see about that and beware of inscizio of vein or of nerve, and extract that, and afterwards close the wound if it indiges, and take care of that until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of forceps that are customarily used to remove arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	They are like the extremities of birds with a beak-like shape that are made sharp when they take hold of the arrow so that it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are made special motifs, large, few and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its slight weakness, and of the amplitude of the wound, and of its constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of an instrument concave to this extremity that is adapted with a bird's beak shape in order to alleviate the instrument of the arrow from it, and impulse of that sordid.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of an instrument of sordid extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	thus with a radius in order to alleviate the instrument from it into the concave arrow and it is propelled with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of the bloodletting of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for bloodletting of which it is customary to bleed thus... of which they are in the head, 16. there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, they are called "alhasisain"; two herbs that appear in the two temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes that are called "aspicientz"; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the upper lip; and two veins that are below the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called "algenic" — ; and there are two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	More, the veins that are bloodletted in the arms are thus:. because of those, one is a cephalic vein, and it is from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is a moderate vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic vein; and the people name it "vein of the whole body", and the basilica is a vein that is placed in the domestic lettuce, and is named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and the funis of the arm, and it is placed above the elbow, and it is that which appears above the pulse for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the auricular finger and the little finger, and there are two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is beneath the curvature of the inner side of the wild lettuce; and the second is sophena, and its place is beneath the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is beneath the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for chronic and migrating and sahafti and ulcerous headaches of the bad old head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you recommend to yourself: it is that you should shave the head of the patient, and should be rubbed on the occiput in the place of both veins with a dry and good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck with a bandage that appears to have two places of premegutz of the head; and seek there with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here it is.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then you insert it beneath the vein in the codeina until the bloodletting comes out to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then you raise your hand on the vein and codeina above the parts and insert the vein in an incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision is the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make a slight flow of blood as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen with poultices and leave it thus until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More, of the two arterial veins that are at the temples, the treatment of bloodletting is for ancient and long-standing migraine and obtalmia and chronic overflow of acute fluids to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what you recommend to yourself: constrict the patient's neck with a motive until the two veins appear at the sentiment for manifest appearance and demonstrate the pulse beneath the finger; and then you will feel it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the codeina above the vein to the parts above with your finger indicating, and insert the bloodletting incidentally beneath, and raise the vein in its place; and insert it thus as you have done in the two other veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then you release the constriction of the patient, and stop your finger on the vein for an hour, and then stop over that spot with poultices and strengthen it above with a strong constriction, and leave it thus until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And previously remembering the remedies, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Thus the juvenation of phlebotomy on the vein of the forehead is appropriate for the phlebotomy of the cephalic to ancient evils of the face and to emigrate and to purge rotten and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy on it is according to what you have recommended to yourself; thus it is that the patient strongly holds the seat with a bandage inside so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the shape.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause at the prominent point where the head of the lancet is above that vein and puncture it with a pen or another instrument in your hand, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then release the perforation of the patient and hold it inside so that it may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened in phlebotomy, however it is not seen that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus with the other phlebotomies, unless it is of a fat extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and fortifies the trench in it when the phlebotomy is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The juvenation of the two veins that are like the lacrimal of two eyes for cleansing the eyes from rot and pus in the eyes, and for ancient evils of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strongly holds the seat with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you stand steady over the head of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And make the phlebotomy according to the transverse, a little along the length of a small phlebotomy, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, it fortifies the extremity of it which is wounded.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on that spot, and hold it for one night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and violent sweat, and for ancient evils of the face and to emigrate and purge rottenness that accumulates in the face, and it is more effective when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of phlebotomy on it is that the patient strongly holds the seat and then place your left hand on the nose, and take the subtle lancet long and fixed in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear at the sensation here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You see that you ultimately put your hand on the small phlebotomy little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, because it is restored gently.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The juvenation of phlebotomy on the two guiding veins leads to constriction of the wings and beginning of leprosy and many ancient evils and impetigo and bad corroding ulcers, thus with herpetiform.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy on those is that the patient strongly holds some cushions under the seat with a bandage; and the artisan stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein along with the phlebotomy, little by little; and then extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed at that time; and then make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the bandage and hold the two veins with a moderate stricture so that the patient is not suffocated, and let it enter into the morning because the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the juvenation of phlebotomy on the Algerian veins helps against small apostemes and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and against bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circle of it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy on those is that you make the patient sit down before you, and hold the seat with a bandage, and then revolve the lips of it and look at the two veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of the two, and that is why in the circle of those small black veins; and then insert each one for an incisive incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have doubt below you, and do not know which one is of those, then you proceed to the incision of the larger one of those, and of the most manifest pus of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it similar to the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to correct by incising the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The juvenation of the two veins that are below the tongue is to approach phlebotomy of the cephalic to suffocations that are in the throat, to the evil of the uvula, and to evils of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloating in those is that it follows the patient between their hands in front of the sun, and raises their tongue, and looks at the back of their tongue, from one vein on the left and another vein on the right, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bloating occurs in each; and beware that you do not ultimately put your hand in bloating those, because then those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bloated in the body are those that usually correspond to all the homes, and the bloating of them is done according to two methods, or they put the bloated mirtilat or olivar at a declining subtlety; or they dissect the bloated cutellar, and appeal to its gentleness, and this is their form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this gentleness is what converges to section and those specific subtle and latent ones according to the amplitude of the veins and according to their structure.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of bloating mirtilat:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is the side of that thus sometimes, and converges to open the concave full veins proceeding apparently gross, and at those that contain gross turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of bloating olivar:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloating is of lesser latitude and of purer subtle extremity, and converges to bloating of subtle veins that contain pure subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Moreover, the juvenation of the bloating of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood from the bad humors that are beneath the gullet and the colon, and from that which drips down to the chest and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it converges to the bloater, when that bloating occurs, that it should guard well that and be above-temperament in that, because then it has an artery, and if it errs and adjusts at the puncture of the bloating, it will incise that artery and accelerate flows of blood, so that it is known that no bloating occurs with a bloater pungent, unless it is secting with gentleness.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear for a manifest appearance, then it is known that you should leave that and move to another, or seek some other branch; or that bloating occurs at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and it is said that bloating with gentleness thus as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	Moreover, if you want the bloating of the thigh, then it is known that within the structure of the arm that you touch the place into which you conjoin the place of the pulses, and place your finger over the spot where you feel; and place the arm and say that the vein in section is concave with gentle bloating thus as we have said; and beware that you do not strike the percussion at some space of the place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you sometimes, as you stretch the ligament, it swells in the place where you have felt with your finger, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if sometimes the blood flows in the bloating thus as aurora of a child, and the blood is subtle red, then you know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then you touch and pause the mentioned finger for a long space; and place the mentioned finger, and if the blood is absent, because motas veins are absent, then you stretch the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And beware of the patient's humor, and be above-temperament of it and do not let that dominate for some days until it is sane.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	Moreover, if the blood is not absent, and sometimes you do not present medicine to that, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is constricted, and the blood is absent; or you take a thread of fistic, and finish that, and take one vein and stretch it over the place of the vein with descending structure and ligament and pulses until another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is absent, good; and if not, then cure that with water of which it is preceded to the reminiscence of the place of the powders that absorbent flux of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the absorption of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Moreover, from the dark vein the bloating is juvenation that extracts the blood from the superior part of the head and to the inferior part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of cephalic, thus as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is known to the bloater that it should be above-temperament in the bloating of it, because then it is a nerve; and then if it adjusts at the puncture of the bloating and touches the nerve, it accelerates to stupor, and it is difficult the healing of it, and far from being sane, and this nerve many times appears to sentiment; and if it is hidden at some homes and is subtle and does not show, then it is known that you pause the bloating in which you bloated with gentle section, and avoid the nerve with your fortitude.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then pinch the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The youthful treatment of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the wheels.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And beware in this treatment, if you want the phlebotomies to purge either olive phlebotomy or myrtle phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it does not touch the artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Never emperor, be careful with your phlebotomy that you guard lest the phlebotomy needle pierce the tender skin of the lacert only superficially, and search for a more suitable location, and do not touch it if it is not ascertained by the primary percussion that it is above that phlebotomy some evacuated.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Never emperor, the vein is apostematized in some men, when it is not phlebotomized by the primary percussion, never touch that apostema again.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the phlebotomy of that one and its accidents are so many, in which you should beware to think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered unless for the conservation of health and for the hope of it and caution against the occurrence of ailments, and that it be done phlebotomy in one of the veins that are in the body, so it is: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that it be done phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter near food, when it appears to have signs of fullness.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let phlebotomy be done on the third day or at first hour after three hours have passed from the morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Never phlebotomy that is administered, unless it brings convenience and necessity to it, or of night or of day, at any hour and in any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And beware that an infant should not be phlebotomized until he has fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except for the fourth month within the seventh, and the old people should not be phlebotomized those who have passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for some mania, beware that you should purge the evil humors from within before the phlebotomy, lest they retain the retained matter, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous humors in the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are pure, and do not nourish the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not phlebotomize the patients who are nauseous and crapulent, nor those who are evacuated from illness nor those who are in a state of drunkenness until that is removed from them, nor those with dropsy, and beware that phlebotomy is tempered according to colic passion and according to vomiting, and according to pain of belly, and according to multiplication of cough and of trouble and of exercise of fasting or of vigilias and of all cause that dissolves virtue, whether it be corporal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider in subtlety of humors within it if the blood is gross, with viands and beverages, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And also enter into bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subtled.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy of it at the foot of the day, so it is around the hour of tierce, thus as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And take care that the foot of that one is guarded on that day from all bad accidents animals, thus as it is anguish, ire, fear, and from all bad accidents corporal, thus as it is trouble and superfluous pain and cough and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at its session, make sure to present the causes in the use of that which corrects customarily in men with aromaticity and odorament and with balms and similar to them according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomizer on a cushion that is put above the cushion of the one who must be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And also extract the evil arm, and touch that one with his hand the phlebotomizer does two or three times; and also stretch the ligament in correction and involve that two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the structure be tempered, because the structure when it is not equal, or the structure is superfluous, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is mollified, and then it prohibits the body from the essence of blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And also the structure, beware that the one who must be phlebotomized touches their hands together between them so that the veins are inflated, and are declared to the sentiment.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And also the phlebotomizer anoints the evil phlebotomy with a few drops of oil antic properly; and also pause the evil finger of the left hand above that vein, below the place where you want the phlebotomy, so that the vein is opened a little, and the percussion is seated because one of the veins is the one that attracts thus as a fugitive cord, and of those it is full of windiness and when you pause the phlebotomy on that, it is contracted from the phlebotomy, and the phlebotomizer is discovered; and the phlebotomy does not touch the vein, and if it touches, that is straightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And then, because it is necessary that the flow of blood in the veins be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then stop the flow of blood, if a vein is opened in a passage, then it is good; and if not, you will iterate to another passage below that place on the limb, or above where you are holding fast, if the place is not affected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is affected, or the patient's health worsens, then you will leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because the strong traction can cause an aposteme to break out, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then iterate the phlebotomy if the love (or affection) is present.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and you subtly feel the blood flowing beneath, and you fear that it will not flow in the quantity that you want, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little, and make sure to hold fast underneath so that the place does not become affected, because the place becomes affected in many homes due to scanty perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Perhaps sometimes that already has become affected, then do not iterate on it, because it does not excuse you from any cause; and stop on that certain part of the wound of the olive oil, because it alleviates the body's blood flow.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place with olive oil than with other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer the olive oil throughout the entire phlebotomy, in which phlebotomies the veins are prohibited from the body's blood flow, and make a tyrical and sagzenous effort when it is stopped on one of those above the place, because the blood is subtly irritated and revolved when it is gross.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of phlebotomy a great aposteme is generated, because many passages are closed, and mainly to that which has not been blooded except for that passage, or in the perception of the little vein, and then you stitch, and stop on the place, applying an infusion of warm water and salt, a slightly scaled area, and hold it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And then, it is necessary that you stop the flow of blood from that vein in completion with it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you remain in the place for some days with some blackness or viridity, do not note that; and if you wish, stop on that certain cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calendula or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many passages are closed, thus apostemes and eminences of the phlebotomy of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then stop your hand over that, and if then you apply a mild compression over that, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you stop on that certain cause of what we have said, because the strong flow of the artery's blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an emplaster on that in which it is stipulated, so that the place may be endured, and then heal that wound with another healing treatment until it is sanctified.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And then, it is necessary to extract from the blood of every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears over the blood, as it seems.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then you will let it issue until it is red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you will let it issue until it is subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, until the acuity of it is stopped.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And then it is necessary for that which is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a passage, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomist be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is fragile, make the contrary of that, and then extract it in many passages, and that the tract be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the better way to administer phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be cross-sectional, not punctured.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and more safe than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in which it is customary to overcome syncope from phlebotomy, and then you cure that during the phlebotomy with a small infusion of milk or of oxymel simply scaled; and extract the blood in three passages or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is of complex composition, then take during the phlebotomy to infuse in an essarop of myrrh or in an essarop of aromatic mel, with special spices as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in an essarop aromatized and very odorant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you fall into syncope from phlebotomy, and it is caused by the issuance of much blood, then it is necessary to take in drinking cold water with an essarop very odorant and subtle; and use aromaticity with galen, and limit the siege of the feet in that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division on the chapter of syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if one wants to evacuate the liquid from the arm and dissolve the second evacuation of blood, it is necessary to apply the flebotomy for a moderate evacuation, and the strength of it is frequent, which evacuates the small amount of blood little by little, according to the quantity of strength in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if one wants to evacuate the liquid from the arm, and give the second vein, and the body is strong, then do so at about 8 or 9 hours of the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	If one wants to attract the blood from the body to the opposite part of the affected area, it is necessary that it be evacuated on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	If the body in which there is much blood that has been wasted and is heated and makes fever, it is necessary that it be given a large quantity of its own blood at once, and that the perception within is amplified so that it synchronizes with the symptoms; for you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand over the pulse of the body's blood, so that no mortal danger occurs in the place of synchronization, because many evacuations are given when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not suitable when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifice of the vein has closed and it is very difficult to extract the blood, for you press underneath with great vehemence and the extension becomes longer, because this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the lancet inside so that it is phlebotomized a second time; or remove what has been heated by the phlebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place on top of that tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress with a ligature inside so that the blood is not issuing out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation is calmed.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to provoke the evacuation of the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then prick that spot or on another arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funnel of the arm" is phlebotomized in the place of the fork or of the basilica, when they are not constricted or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient inserts their hand in warm water until the vein becomes apparent and manifests itself clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it should be strengthened over that limb with a strict ligature; and phlebotomized according to the small transverse, not laterally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it should be a broad perception and your phlebotomy is the one in which you phlebotomize that on the joint of the hand, a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you obtain what you need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in warm water, and it is customary to place the body of the blood in warm water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy of this vein is more salvageable than all the other veins, because it has no pulsating vein, nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the little finger on the right hand is convenient for the illnesses of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that you strengthen your hand with a ligature or with your own hand, because you have placed it in warm water, until the vein becomes inflated and is well demonstrated to the sight; and then phlebotomize transversely; and if you insert it all at once, you will not feel anything in return.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to ultimate your hand in phlebotomy, because then it is the nerves of the fingers that are denuded of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then stop on the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly, it is necessary that you do everything in a straight line.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	If the juvenation of phlebotomy of that on the left hand is convenient for the illnesses of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And it does similarly in phlebotomy as one has done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the juvenation of the cephalic vein in phlebotomy is for illnesses that are on the lower part of the body, as well as for motherly illnesses, and for retention of menses, and for illnesses of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and legs, ancient and similar to those illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that it enters the cold foot with warm water and makes a friction on that spot until the veins appear; and it is above the joint of the foot in the course; and the place where the vein gives the said poultice, and from there it ramifies into the facial part of the foot, almost reaching.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	So we give a full poultice to the pus and apply it to the leg where the ankle is, because it is better and more healthy.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you apply the poultice to the facial part of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath the facial part of the foot, and pause your poulticing on the traversing area, lest you wish to injure it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the poultice be warm.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if it is prohibited to stop the flow of blood; then you iterate the patient's foot in warm water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the poultice-maker makes an error in the first dressing, then iterate with the poultice in a small area, because the place is healthy; and do not fear the evil magic, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly make a poultice on the corresponding part of the other foot in equilibrium.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And regarding the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said above the ankle at the juncture of the woody partition.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the aid of the poultice of the patient is a remedy for when it is due to blood being drawn out by cauterization.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the poultice of the patient is that it enters in a bath, and it fortifies and strengthens the patient's body from the waist to the ankle below, for about four fingers' width in a long subtle band, so that it appears only through that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, then you poultice that according to each engineer that is possible for you and according to the traversing, and it is better; or inject that for injection or section that for sectio, because the place of the patient is healthy.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most homes very familiar; and if you touch that, and it does not appear at all sentiment, then poultice some part of the patient, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the auricular and annular veins.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and make flow from the blood the quantity that you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the tension and pause over the place of the poultice, and strengthen the place, because the relaxation is healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilations are of corns, or of herbs, or of glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two methods, because one is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 13 places of the body, of which one in which the ventilations are paused is at the ankle; and the middle place of the neck between two parts of the collarbone; and ventilations below the mandible just below the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of the alohoster, and it is above the end of the coccyx; and ventilations of two focils, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavilhas; and ventilations of two cuoyssas.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small, sparse veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not catch virtue through those, just as it is done for poulticing; nor do they believe that ventilation should be done with fire or without fire in any illness made by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if it is necessary to provoke ventilation for illness or for continuity, we will administer that at every hour at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time it is.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is because in some homes it is blood that is multiplied until they indicate extraction of it by ventilation and touches the heavy, grave, and swollen head; and from those it touches repletion and rigor on their face and head, and on their neck; and from those it touches prostration on their face and forehead, and darkness and faintness in their eyes; and from those that throws away the place of their ventilation; and from those whose blood is multiplied; and from those it touches pleasant blood in their mouth, or the tongue is apostemed and spits blood; and from those whose sleep is multiplied, and from those who vomit blood in their sleep with rigor and antics and plagues and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And then when it happens in any of those causes, and properly if it is on the third or middle day of the month, then we command that ventilation should be done after two or three hours have passed from the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The youth of the swelling in the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and at that point it is deep in the veins; moreover, it is necessary to evacuate the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this swelling is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic (head).
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not lawful to use that which is of complete friction, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great annoyance.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it is not suitable to use those veins, and in the ends of which there are bad, faulty frictions.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Moreover, to the one who continues above it is made forgetfulness; and therefore it is suitable that you command the sweller to remove his hand a little from the affected parts below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Moreover, the swelling of Alkehel is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and therefore it confers asthma, and constriction of the ale, and scission of the instrument of ale, and to those, and replenishment.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is suitable that the Alkehel swelling be reduced a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debilitation in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the swelling of Alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and obtundity, and emigration, and foreclusion, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilisk.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is suitable that you command the sweller not to press his hand on scarification, lest he incises the artery and accelerates flows of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the swelling below the chin confers acidity in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resemblance to those bad frictions that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the alihelic vein that is in both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Moreover, the swelling that is made on both spatulas confers a captivation, which is made for replenishment of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the swelling of both divided parts of the focils confers youth of phlebotomy of three veins, thus it is of the basilica, dark, and cephalic, because that attracts the blood from all those veins plus manual ones that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins enter so that the attraction goes to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the sweller not to proceed too much in scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and below it there are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a swelling that is swollen above the hips and confers hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is suitable that you command the sweller to be a large swelling, and that it be of iron, because the place indicates a strong desiccation; and strongly those subtle swollen veins are scarified in scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Moreover, the swellings of the minor veins are manifested by minuiction, because they attract the blood from the entire body, and confers ancient pains of the joints and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provoke the menses, and confers to bothor and ademil; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of two saphenas, and alahorcoben, and of two cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Therefore, I will debilitate the entire body and cause syncopy in many homes.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the swellings, Alahorcoben youth is proposed to the youth of the swellings of two veins.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the swellings is that it pauses the swelling at the beginning of the vein and sucks for temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the swellings, moreover, it pauses those ligaments, and remains those coagulated, and that the humors come to the place for adventitious engorgement.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease iterating that and continue until you see the place already enraged and inflated, and that appears the rigor of the blood.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who has tender flesh and rare pores, it is suitable that you scarify him moderately and not too much, lest the place be ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the sweller to amplify the scarification and press a little, and temper the suction with facilitation.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is gross, then it is suitable to scarify two moderate ways, because in the first way it opens the path of subtlety to the blood and to its fluidity.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Moreover, in the second, there is a perscrutation acquired from the extraction of gross blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very feculent, then let the third scarification be made for it conquers the remainder.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should scarify in many places; and if we know that the blood is abundant, then it is necessary to scarify beforehand by scarifying abundantly.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which lies the depth of the cord just as much alone.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the cord is thick, hard, dark, and the juices are very strained, it is necessary that the places of the cupping glasses are not tender, opened with resolved [purposes]; if it is in summer, thus as it is oil of aloeswood or oil of violets, or oil of bitter chamomile, or oil of cinnamon; and if it is in winter, then it is narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or of blood, and to those that seem [similar].
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the surplus is great, fresh, then the oil should be marjoram, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloe wood, or oil of aniseed, and to them that seem [similar].
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupper is of ample pores to tend to flesh, then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and it is necessary that the places of cupping are washed with warm water or fresh water from a solar still, or water from a cistern, or water from a gutter, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the blood is of much humidity, wash its cupping glasses with vinegar and water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the surpluses are great, wash its cupping glasses with vinegar and water of sanicle, which is marjoram, or of decoction of aniseed, or of chamomile, and to them that seem [similar].
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that the cupping be kept away from wind; having care that it should be administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and it is necessary that one sleeps close to the cupping.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that should be governed, so that the blood-letting operator is regulated before the cupping.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is necessary to consider the beginning: then if the cupper or he who should blood-let is choleric and vents upon the agitated and inflamed blood, then it is necessary to take causes of cooling, thus as mild acidic grains, and endive in vinegar and laytuguas, and scamabin, and julip, and similar to those.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their wanderings thus as poultices, and flesh of golden sewn seams, and wandered condiments with grains, and to those that seem [similar].
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the complexion is fresh, it is necessary to take in drink essaroop of golden milk, or essaroop of scamabin seeds, and sumac, and with much odorant mixture between viel and noel; and that it be commended to use a little of drinking and eating, and pause the wanderings of its poultice and canabir and pissers and small seams and columbat.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and blood-letting the drink should be more than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary that it be given to drink in certain hours to certain homes tyrical aphorisms, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or alcita away from the cupping or away from blood-letting or near, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtled; and it is not necessary that they take that scaldfath.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the cuppings that have scarification are cuppings that are paused on the feet, and on the ankle and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the pustule of the anch, because these members do not suffer from scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but attraction of blood from a member, thus as pausing cupping on the mamilha in bad flux of blood of the blood of the veins; and we use that so that the fresh cupping is dissolved, inviscated from the member, thus as pausing on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scales off the pain, resolving cupping.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And then it is paused on the kidneys when they are inflamed in their operation or stone, because by virtue of strong attraction the kidney's operation is fortified and eradicates the stone from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it is done when it is paused on the feet and ankle, which must have cupping in those enclosed places.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cuppings are administered with suction as much alone; and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of water of tepid warmth in the bad fluxes of the ankle.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the cupping should be filled and should be more grand, thus it is warm water alone or water in which are cooked herbs for that convenience.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping administered with fire: let the amplitude of the orifice be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the pricking should be the width of a palm; and let it be in the fat of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the width of it, the prick should be small according to the quantity that enters into it with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is fitting to place a warm poultice of rough texture, with large margins, lemon, and bitter herbs, so that the member does not deviate from its proper position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it is at the middle of the transverse vein of the arm or iron, where a candle is placed above the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the great remedy that we have recommended; and the small portion of it according to the illnesses and the state of he who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping glasses of the elderly are extinguished, as others are those of the young and of large corpulent bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this cupping glass over the member is that it extends the flame of fire decently downwards into a small candle made of wax, and place it above the middle of the transverse vein in the middle location of the cupping glass, so that the fire may be kindled around the part below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed over the member of the patient, and the finger is on the spot that we have mentioned, until when you have the cupping glasses and do not indicate that they obstruct the finger and release the vapor above that spot, then the cupping glass will be almost dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And adjust the flame according to its manner, and remove it if it is indicated by that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Sometimes a cupping glass is administered in the case of flatulence, with water, in which there is no transverse vein nor spot, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed over the member only superficially.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: This cupping glass, when it is larger, is better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 148.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood-letting is not administered in many members except in those where it is not possible to place cupping glasses, due to their smallness, such as the foot and gum, which are similar to them; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose, and similarly.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found blood-letting cups that are in the stagnant waters of mundane poisons.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they are soaked in stagnant water during the day and night until they are famished, and that no remnant of the cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated through flea-botany and cupping glasses; and then the member of the patient is cooled until it becomes red; and then they are placed over him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and fallen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck from the place of the cupping glass, it is more desirable in juvament (treatment).
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, then wash the place with a gentle hand and then with much water; and it is cooled and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the blood is prolonged by the administration of blood-letting cups, and it is that which remains, then you soak a piece of linen in cold water, and place that over it until the remaining fluid is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle over it powdered vitriol, or gall and similar things to those of stiptic causes, until the blood is absorbed; or place on the spot the seeds of roasted fava beans, and soak them until the beans adhere to the spot, and the blood is absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And similarly, if it is necessary, repetition of blood-letting cups, when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the blood-letting cups are prohibited from suspension, then cool the spot with recent blood or fix a needle in the spots until blood comes out; and then they are placed, because those who feel some blood almost immediately recover.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall, sprinkle over them a little powdered aloe, or salt, or ash, and it will happen almost immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, you should know that many foolish doctors and vulgar people, who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is fitting that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten anything in a long time being entirely forgotten; and I have not acquired what comes after, except through the longevity of reading the books of the Ancients and studying with understanding, until they extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I direct my experiment and study throughout the longevity of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which has passed my experiment; since here I abbreviate it to you others and deliver it from the occupation of elongation; and I abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and I show it at the end of declaration; and I form it in many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, thus I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which the necessary precautions are, before we begin remembering the fractured members and diverse injuries.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	It is fitting then that I should define in the proem of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which in the beginning are forced by the craftsmen and stationed over the truth of these; so it is you and those who are so prompt that they may know or apprehend this noble art other than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when accidents occur due to a fracture or dislocation or bruise or fall, then it is fitting that you should take care at the beginning with flea-botany or alleviate that, or whatever symptoms, if no cause prohibits it, thus with debilitation of virtue, or it is that which occurs suddenly, or viel in decrepitude, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And you should be content with a diet of fresh herbs and of lean meats of birds and of crab-fish; and prohibit gross meats and fill up on diets and all diet that fills the veins of blood, until you are secure from apostema caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their primary regimen as they were accustomed to it before.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And then when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is fitting that the patient should be fed with nutritious diets of subtle and light food, avoiding those which are viscous, thus as they are fed with foods made from flour, such as bread, rice, caps, fish, and fresh fruits, and gross and similar things, and in this regimen is made coagulation of fracture pus, with gentle movement and milk.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that the broken bones, when they are in the old people who are in the first decay and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they can be continued and consolidated according to their nature through the desiccation of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time through the desiccation of those members, and they continue and consolidate those that are of theirs at the end of the lentitude, thus as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But the imperial nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of all parties any similar cause to glue in which it is grossly strengthened that adheres and strengthens until they are completely consolidated and united, until they reach the end of fortitude and firmness, thus as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits that from their works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this cause it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, thus as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Various diversity of fracture according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, because fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have come to a remembrance of all species of fracture, explained in their own distinct chapter separate from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Various diversity of fracture in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their meteyssas; because it is made arcuate fracture another that which occurs in the stars; and some veiled ones are made fracture according to the longitude of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and stellar and additional proceeding and not-proceeding, thus as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is fracture fissure petty.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to each species is born or torment proper in restoration of the bone according to that which will come remembrance of it distinctly in their own places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign or indication of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that it is known as fracture of the bone: it is twisting of it, and of that prominence and appearance of it to the feeling, and so of it when it comprehends that in your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And then when it is not in the twisted location apparent nor does it feel deviated from the proper touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a twisted or small fissure, therefore you do not feel that you manipulate it with your hand and with total compression; pause over it from the medicines of which you have remembrance at that moment which convenes to the place; and then it will be straight for subtle stricture.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the place where it is arcuated and not separated into two or another that does not occur in the sagitta, thus as it is manipulated totally by its own comparison, then it is fitting to begin from your hour of rectification of it, because it will accede to apostema caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it accedes to apostema caution, then it will leave that for some days until the apostema ceases; and then you should engage that according to whatever manner you can of levitation and of engendering.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You should know that restoration of it and agility of it are more desirable than the bone in which the accident occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that second [part] which will bring back the memory of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	Perhaps in the bone so shattered, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or take your hand if the member is small; or take two cords or one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And it is your position in which you hold the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member, then you perform so that they return to their proper place and according to each manual skill that you have in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware that you do not fall on the patient during your operation, nor harm them; and perform according to your gentle power that you apply one bone with another in their companionship, according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is opportune that at that hour you touch with your hand there, and if sometimes here some diverse cause, rectify that and straighten it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as many foolish doctors who have caused aposteme through their operation, or have caused contraction in the member, just as we have seen that through the operation of their foolish methods.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connect, then equalize and perform a decent operation and structuring of that member, and rest and tranquility; admonish the patient about it and make them understand that they should not move it during their watches and sleep, and see its revolution and agitation, and remove its ejection, and remove all its movements with total virtue; and beware that the position of the member is a position in which pain is secured, which causes because one feels in the disposition of the position of the member or lesion; then it is opportune to permute it to another disposition of it where it does not feel pain; and see that the position of it is direct and equal, so that the member does not incur tortuousness when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; because you should know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the toe, and similar to those, then it is opportune that the enveloping be with a very subtle wrapping.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Perhaps those that are large, such as the hip or the leg, it is opportune that in those there be a strong and hard enveloping, because the strong connection connects the great member and strengthens it entirely in equal structure, so that in it no morbid matter enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, then your evacuation of equalization, pause the convenient liaison according to that, on the place of that fracture with three envelopings or four according to the member's merit; and strengthen your hand a little at the liaison.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then see that you go to the part above the place of the fracture, and strengthen less so that you do not force your structure on the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then elongate yourself in the enveloping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure little by little, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and envelop that other wounded part over the broken place with an enveloping, and then see to the envelopings at the part above below the fracture; and be your operation in the structuring of the enveloping and in softening of it according to what we have said in the first enveloping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the turns of stopping the lion or wrapping with which the tortuousness of the fracture is equalized, if there is tortuousness in it; and if not, do not pause for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause on the other bandage, and then equalize over these envelopings decently made so far, if in the place there is no inflammation or aposteme caused, and then pause on it that sits the aposteme and that removes the inflammation; and lay it aside for some days; and then you strengthen over the same stalks.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And these stalks are of the majesty of a cane of strong race, and be formed wisely; or they are of wood of pine; or of palm branches; and let the amplitude of each stalk be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is opportune that the stalk which is paused over that fracture be thicker and stronger a little than the other stalks, and the length of the stalk according to what is suitable for the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the stalks with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then bind beneath decently according to what we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when it is more elongated from the fracture, it mends less the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is opportune that the threads are middle-sized in thickness and subtlety, and are of soft wool; and if the threads are thick, just as I have seen through the operation of some foolish doctors pausing the threads of cord from the tortuous, and it is a great error, when one loses the structure outside of equalization.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And the examination of subtle feelings is not so convenient, because you do not constrain them by structure as those that you want, and it does not happen that between this and that there is a measure of a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stars to place the structure in their own places, then stop those of stopping the lion or the caramelized hand within so that it does not make a lesion.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some bruised fractures are a plague, and accidents disrupt the code, and you will find a reminiscence in that capital according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that all broken members are not straight on the first day; the cause is that the member, when it's large, does not fit onto the stars until five or seven days, according to your careful observation of the advent of abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the splint-makers among whom the Ancients restored, who placed them on fracture and dislocation and torsion.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of splinting as an aid to restoration of fracture, convenient for complex and major wounds on women and children, because it is about the one that does not allow heat or cold: and it is that you take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you comfort it in this way, unless you remove the crust from the egg white, and place the complexation of it without space or subtlety; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manual for implanting and restoring fracture and dislocation: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is a mixture of millet salvage, one drachm; of myrrh and aloes one drachm; of alochil one drachm twenty; all are triturated and mixed with water or album of egg white if the complexity of the patient's wound is shallow; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quite easily, and confers a lot of relief.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manual for implanting which confers on fracture and dislocation: recipe of migrach and a half drachm of white altea; of myrrh and aloes one and a half drachms; of acacia one and a half drachms; of Armenian bol two and a half drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All three trissatz in mortar with the very contracting motion, and three crust-removers, and three comforters in the water or in the egg white, and it is administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of splinting for joints and separated bones in their own places, and then accidental pain occurs in those and cracks and fractures: take the whole suture and submerge it in warm oil and cook it and place it on the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this splint, there is no virtue of restoration, of careful abscess and expelling pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of splinting that restores broken bones: take threads of fig tree sort and threads of salvaged poppy; mix all together and make a splint of their own.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of splinting administered to restore fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: recipe mixture of alta, of chamomile and violet flowers, of wheat flour, of all one part. all three trissatz and three comforters in wine, if the member is not scaly.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	More if it is scaly, then comfort it with water of sweet colander or with water and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of splinting which is strong in resolution that this first, when it helps abscess hard to restore the member: recipe of mixture of alta and of sesame of liar, and of balaustia, and mellilot, majorana, violet flowers, of chamomile, of all one part; all three trissatz and three comforters in water of sage or in water of two or in wine, all that according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	More, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free art that it is placed on the broken member for its restoration, unless a wax figure is made of wax and oil, and no other cause; and recommends that it is mixed between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	More, Galen says that it is seen that they are placed on the broken member for its restoration, and the causes in which it is dryness of small heat, thus also with myrrh, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	For the treatment of painful limbs that cause pain: take mixture, of cedar, of hazelnuts, of pine seeds or filberts, and of salt, partially ground; and make a poultice with wax and resin, and apply it skillfully.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Measure the quantity according to which you think that the ligament is relaxed and then dislocated, it is that you consider if there is no accident, nor bruising, nor the bone is broken, nor it has moved from its place, then do not delay more than a few days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you encounter a violent pain or bruising or inflammation at the location, then take care of it immediately, and remove the poultice from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth of linen and marine sponge, humid and soft, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the location until the bruising and pain cease; and then let the limb rest for an hour; and then place a poultice made from lard and oil or rose oil, spread over the area, and let it stay there for a night until you are sure of the apostemic caution, and that the inflammation of the limb is reduced, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a subtle and gentle structure with a small poultice, not too strong for your primary constriction, and subtly introduce it until it is healthy.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the aposteme and redness and pain and inflammation and all the accidents have been completely alleviated, and you are free from poultices and structures, then apply it in this way as you did at the beginning of the treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if you do not encounter any of the causes mentioned earlier in the limb, then do not delay it for three days or four or five; and some remedies have been left out, which are applied for 20 days according to how it appears per the dislocation of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust it in the structure more than in your primary structure altogether, and adjust it in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More often if you find the location of the fracture is dry and thin, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; and therefore embrocate it with warm water every two hours; and let it be so for three days; and loosen the structure a little, and through this operation correct the limb's nourishment, and it will be healthily restored.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More often it happens that the foolish restorers of the limb's fracture do another way when it is not restored from the beginning, according to what they know, and it is restored according to their own twistedness, it is an error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if they were directing it, they would increase the Ancients' books and would have done that work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anything of theirs that they do, because it is more reasonable that they do nothing.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of the fracture that occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by percussion of the spine, and the percussion pushes all the bone into the ciphac, which is behind the bone, just as it happens in the chest, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the spine enters into a part of the bone, and enters into its flesh and does not pass into its back; and this species of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or little, and of fracture that is contracted or compressed; and the cause of it is percussion with a poyle or fall onto a stone, and its symptoms are similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the peritoneum which is behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or little.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the fracture is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like fracture, and for this reason it is called this species of capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made or by fall or by percussion of the stone and its symptoms are similar, which makes enter some layer of the bone into the inner parts, and it is made in the concave location just as it happens to the edges of the eram when they happen to their percussion and it is parted from their entrance into the inner parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it happens in the bodies of human bones, just as it happens to the heads of elephants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus all these species of fractures are categorized, they are weights just as they are separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will find remembrance of all that in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I will recognize all these species of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry into their tents and signs of corrupted flesh that are over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special type of hair-like material is recognized because it is discovered over the bone, and it is absorbed, and limited around the tender area, since the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see through the accidents that signify manifest signs over pain, such as vomiting from colic, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and efflux of urine, and rigor of those, and similarity to their accidents in major predispositions, they do not depart from health.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-concurrent accidents you despair of health, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that it has come to you in the beginning as a plague and it is during the winter days, then you should study the ostentation of the bone within thirteen days according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, then you should touch the bone within seven days, having care that the bone not be corrupted by the panicle, and that the accidents which we have recounted do not occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has penetrated to the panicle covering the brain, and it is with divided and atrophied parts, then you should incise the divided and atrophied part, according to what you have recounted to yourself.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner possible to you, according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to detect the bone, whether with an abundance of blood or aposteme caution, then you oppose yourself to him who has need, and it is that you fill the place of drawn-out infusions in wine and rose oil, and make the plague repose until it be seated the aposteme, and you are secure from abundance of blood; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that is according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one manner is that you incise the bone with an incision of straight style, and this is its form: And then administer another incision, a little wider later than that; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more incisions wider than the one according to the rule.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have different names of diverse incisions, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the acute extremities, and are of iron or felt.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them to facilitate percussion over the incision so that it does not touch the head and leads to that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of it within that you administer the incisions with the trowels, which are called non-deep trowels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus but because those do not reach the term of the bone to that which is next to it, so that the trowel is round-ended or margin on that which is beneath the head of the agout-like margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the narrowness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these trowels, a great number of which almost converge on the narrowness of each bone, until it be present to you in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is pointed, the quantity in length and breadth being according to the quantity of narrowness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of trowels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the trowel over the bone and revolve it with the fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then you permit the trowel to another place, and pause what is between all the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environment around.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you incise with incisions what is between each tract of the bone, and make it more subtle that you place on it in the end of levitation, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or at your hand, or for some other cause among several instruments which will be prepared for that, as we have done, and forceps subtle.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you keep with all caution that the incision does not touch any cause of the cephalic.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus you will have circuited the perforated bone, and it will be separated from the cephalic if it is continued in it, and you will have extracted that, it is necessary to razor and equalize that in the asperity of it from what is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incision, but more imperious, because it is more thin and more subtle than the other incisions.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you remove some part of the small bones and cartilages, then take that which is facilitated in what is necessary for you of the instruments; and then cure the plague with ointments and anointing those which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manual operation is to evacuate, far from fear, which Galen and the majority said was for great relief; and this is the sermon of it: it is necessary for you at the commencement that commences to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and placed it beneath the extremity of this insensitive and light instrument, which is the form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	It is that the lunar part is slow and does not cause any harm, and the acute part is of it in two lines beforehand in length, thus at times; so that the lunar part be adjusted to the ciphac on the face of the incident acute bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you pierce over the instrument of a part with a small hammer until you have divided the whole bone easily, thus as it is revolved, and you will be secure from the panniculus that does not fall into the accident that you fear in no way, and if the doctor was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their own; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if you remove any annexed cause from the bone of the panniculus in certain places of the bone, you will cut that of it with the extremity of the instrument, and you will deliver that of it easily, because it is delivered from its nocuments and its fears.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is absent or separated from the bone is its face, and remains in its asperity and subtle stagnations, then it is necessary to remove that asperity and eradicate those stagnations with subtle razors for which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible to administer them in all places most convenient to their direction and most direct according to what you perceive in your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is necessary to administer in your razor at the time when you make the bone begin with the most latent of those razors, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease far from what follows in continuity until you have obtained to administer the whole tone and the whole subtle part of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	More in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what you perceive for rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that has not been diminished over all those which have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And I will stop on what we have written and shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus is retracted when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary to take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in warm rozat, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and warm rozat, and place it over the primary drap so that you can do the most gentle operation possible on that, which does not graze the ciphac; and then administer over that liament slowly, and do not stretch it unless for the quantity that the wound has solely.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that in this care for one day or two until you are secure from apostemic caution; and then dissolve it and administer medicines as those which suppress excessive dryness, thus with linseed oil and flour of barley, and powder of gum and aristology, and similarly to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make from these powdered medicines a powder to be sprinkled over the wound, thus as they are dry; and universally, administer in all medicine of property of which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and it should not be in the surdity of envy or another; nor should you allow virulence to aggregate in it; because when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and destroys it, and falls upon the malaute with that malignant malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it falls upon the ciphac of the head, as it is mondified by the bone and majorly when the cure of it is misrepresented, and it is blackened on its surface; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the malaute with the accidents that we have said, knowing that they are perilous and totally opposite.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not blacken except from the medicine that is placed beneath, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackening, then it is necessary to take of honey a part and of warm rozat in three parts. and with those liniments make a drap, and then place it over the ciphac; and then cure it with the species of cure that converge until it is sanctified.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that it is not broken in the nose unless two parts are simultaneously injured, or one of those hollow veins, because there are two bones, because the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not fall to it except with attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two broken parts is torn away, then be careful that you introduce the small finger into the wounded nose, and that you rejoin that fracture with the same indication, and with the same pus before, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do it for yourself to facilitate, and beware that you don't fall into that operation on the patient's painful limbs.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then be careful that it is equalized with the extremity of a rod on which is a small groove.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the likeness of that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then place the limb in a position of rest with the help of an apostematum bandage.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth from it, if the fracture is in one part, or two small calipers, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the large groove of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And thus some of the ancient restorers who had calipers inserted in wood, and were permuted throughout the day, but it was not seen by me; however, I have found that the piece is inserted into a wooden box as if comforting with powder of mulberry; and then place the caliper until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some veiled ones are inserted into the nose, in place of a caliper, almost like a hawk's claw, enveloped with cloth from the lion; and it is that you already have the fracture of the nose very violently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, use calipers.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if you happen to have another veiled apostematum bandage, plaster the nose with cerate or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilion.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not happen to have an apostematum bandage, then be careful that you plaster beforehand with flour of Sizamum and powder of crushed horns in a wooden box; and then place it over the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken into small fragments or are comminuted, then be careful that you collect them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for them; and then close the suture, and cure it in a way that encarnates and consolidates, and plaster it in a convenient way.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if you happen to have a wound inside the nose, then be careful that you cure it with calipers and administer lead tubes until it is completely healthy.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with a wound, be careful then if the fracture is only superficial, and not broken into two and curved to the internal parts, then its treatment is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And be careful, therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, that you introduce the index finger of your left hand into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the index finger of your right hand; and press gently with the finger on the inner part of the fracture to facilitate the repositioning of the parts beforehand, with your other hand on the outer part of the bone; and in this way you will equilibrate the bone.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, then be careful that you administer extension of the two parts according to a straight line until it is possible to achieve equilibrium.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you happen to have conmotion of teeth to dislocation, then strengthen those which you think will remain in a thread of gold or silver or copper; and then place over the broken jaw cerate, and place over it a double layer of cloth, and place over the large star-shaped cloth decently made, or a piece of sole leather along the length of the jaw; and then tie it underneath according to how you have prepared the binding of it and how you apply it, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and stop eating the food of the lions' sorbs.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure has already been altered in some manner, then be careful and delay it until the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and plaster it with powder of mulberry, or with flour of Sizamum, or with powder of crushed horns in a wooden box, since you will have removed the cerate from it, and placed over the plaster the lion's paw.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then add cum sta annex and adjust that plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, so that it does not dislodge until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many veiled fractures are straightened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another viewing accident occurs, then administer what we have said in the aforementioned method for soothing the patient's interior so that it may be healthy and the aforementioned aposteme may be removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a painful wound, then consider whether it is a separated or reunited bone, and subtly examine those reunions to see what is convenient for the removal of those instrumental parts.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the wound is narrow, then amplify it with a flesh-botometer according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have finally removed those reunions, and they will not be reunited again, then close the orifice of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place one of the suitable emplausters that are convenient for that and incarnate that, until it may be healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the crucible when it is injured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many views are broken, the crucible of the joint is torn apart from the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is torn, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not reunite; and it is easier to restore it; or it is also that they reunite in the instrumental parts, and it is difficult to restore it; or it is also that the fracture is a painful wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a painful wound, is that you should have two ministers present, so that one holds the adjuster and supports the torn crucible, and the other extends the veil over that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then bind the fracture with the tightest ties within so that it is made in its form according to what is necessary, and it does not bulge out or become concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place under the thigh of the patient a spatula of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the crucible and shorten the spatula with your hand until it binds the fracture as necessary.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot straighten the extremity of the crucible to its former parts, because it has been perverted to the prone position, then it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their back, and place upon the muscle of one thigh a large cushion.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of the thigh down to the parts below so that the bone of the crucible is elevated as it was in its proper position, and then you straighten the fracture and bind it with the tightest ties.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	You feel reunions of the crucible and its majesty, then it is necessary to bend over that and extract those reunions to facilitate.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision on it with one of the incisors that have been prepared for that, because you had placed under the crucible the instrument that serves the ciphac; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, which is its form.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a knife of which this is the concavity; and its width is according to what you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	You adjust the length of it according to what is possible for you during the operation; that there are two extremities also at times, and one extremity is wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have made when you extracted the reunion of the bone is wide, and yet it is sure of careful stitching, then you adjust the two lips of the wound in suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear careful stitching, then you fill the wound with cloth and powders according to the quantity of the separation of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you make careful stitching, then put a cloth in good agreement and oil rose and wine, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	You structure the bone when it is a wound and a section, so that you place an emplaster made of flour of millet in album of wool, and place it over the stoppage of the lion, and then place the spatula under the thigh, if you need it; and then take humectant, so that it is not too long, and its width is about a palm or around that; and then place duplicated powders over the stoppage and emplaster; and then take a thin tablet of wood whose width is three fingers and similar length; and then wrap that in cloth, and then wrap that cloth on the tablet at the site above the fracture site; and then place humectant as it revolves, and revolve that around the neck of the thigh and under the thigh, and under the thigh of the patient, and reduce that over the entire part, and when the structure of the fracture is descending structure, and this is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And thus, that the tablet is not majestically placed over the torn bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, because when the ligament is mollified or the tablet is already reunited, then you straighten that and strengthen the bonding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's sleeping body on their back, and place underneath them a small cushion at night; so that it may be elevated by the assistant of theirs from the side of that, and thus is elevated the fracture of the furcula to an elevation of the muscle; or their arm will be lifted to their back.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage if it does not adhere to the wound or abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the dressing if you have seen their face to that water, and adjust in the structure and restore it thus that it may be restored and the fracture of the furcula may be coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some vegetables given to some men are done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in the broad part of theirs and does not break unless at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when the part of theirs is broken — and it is broken in the middle part of theirs — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture forces you to prepare theirs and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner of engineering, which is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place on the dusty place of many albas of that man and stop the lion; and then place a double-layered cloth of drap; and then place on the starry board of subtle table according to the quantity of the entire spatula or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Perhaps if the starry board is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you will engage that concavity with a stopper, and then balance the starry board according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen below with a long humanation by decent construction and firmness of the starry board until it is not removed from its own place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandage every day; and all vegetables that are softened, another vegetable is strengthened and equalizes the starry board if it is removed from its own place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And let the patient be about their own side thus.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when this number is completed, then you will dissolve the bandage, and you will know for certain that it is of the bones which began not to be tender nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the ankle and put underneath the cushion, then you will split above it, and lift it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the furcula with careful attention to the abscess, being cautious so that it adheres here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, some vegetables are broken in the middle place of theirs and that tart endures; perhaps the extremities of theirs move slowly and are comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of theirs when the middle of theirs is broken, it is that which declines to the internal parts and adheres to the great pain, and difficulty in the hale, and toes, and strengthens and vomits blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sentiment.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of theirs is that the patient be resupinated on their own back, and placed between the shoulders of theirs with one cushion; and then press on their muscles, and adjust their ribs to the more than two rib-stops, and subtily proceed in the operation of theirs and in the equalization according to every manner that is possible and convenient, until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place on their dressing and stop and place above the starry board of subtle table of sawdust or of chalk and of its similar levitation, since you envelop that in drap; and then subtily proceed to bind that above the broken bone so it is not moved; and go with the binding according to retonditat on the back some vegetables, and strengthen that with decent structure; and then consider the binding at every hour, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to provoke the dislocation of that from corrosion or bruising, or pain, or abscess that adheres in the place, then you will cut and dissect that and eradicate the dressing and rectify what adheres for that manner of cure; and then reduce the dressing, if times return to that face; and adjust their structure until it is healthy.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in gross places that follow the back; and of the extremities of theirs from the front part do not adhere to those contradictions unless for what is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of theirs is not hidden from the sentiment because of the inquiry into theirs with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it envelops the fracture in the fingers according to the possible method, so that it is enveloped according to what is convenient, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone in its place, if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining into the divided parts, then it causes the patient vehement pain and puncture, just as puncture that causes pain to one who has suffered a fall, and because of this, the bone sets in its covering; and it causes difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Anticodes have been prepared in that matter with many ingenious remedies.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them it is said: they cause the patient to take windy remedies that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is driven out to the divided parts beforehand.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We must avoid giving him that remedy so that it does not cause the gathering of evil humors, if it does not help; and if it does help, then it will assist in that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they discovered some of them that were stopped under the windings and then sucked with a strong fortitude; and it is similar to reasoning, but most of the time it is feared that the windings attract the superfluities to the place of debilitation.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they discovered some of them: it is said that the place should be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and powders are placed between the ribs until it is full, so that it is the binding that envelops according to retention; and then the patient is treated with a cure of poultices and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes vehement constriction to the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts its covering in punctured pain, they think about the patient, then it is said that they should put a bandage on the place, discover the broken rib, and then stop using that instrument which preserves the phlegm, the remembrance of which precedes, and which facilitates the bone, and extracts it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a closure, and heal it with plasters until it is sound.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if it causes divided aposteme, then you should apply a cushion and pour powders in rose oil and place them on the area, and the patient is treated with what is suitable for the divided aposteme.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be raised above the bed where he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine, back, and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some veiled injuries involve fracture of the neck bones, and similarly they have an atrition, and it is similar to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And with that, it causes harm to some and wants to know if it will be healed or not, then consider, because many times the veins are more mollified and stupified and deadened and cannot move them nor extend nor strengthen them, and when they constrict them in the tender fingers or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the midst of these dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if it moves them and feels in them a constriction in the fingers and puncture, then you know that the nut of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to that and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider its weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that it is mollified, it causes harm to those who have been affected in the same way, and then when they sit on their back, they experience windiness and lack of appetite according to their will, and some veiled injuries are raised above their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not struggle with its treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	We must not attribute some cause to those, the cause is worse and more evil.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of it is that you perform a sedation of the evil humors that gather above the atrited spine with rose oil sol, or with mugwort of hue and sat; place it on those veiled injuries every day until the evil humors are sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and strengthen it above that wound; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where he feels pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it causes the atrition of the satiated bones or some cause that has already been separated from it, then it is said to secede above the codena and to remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with a suture if it is large; and then heal it with an encarnated remedy for the enguements, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	We must if the bone is broken in the last vertebrae, and it is the end of the coccyx, then it is said that you should enter the finger of your left hand into the anus, and envelop the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible for secondary equilibrium; and then place a plaster on it and bind it, if needed, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel stagnant humors settled in the patient, then put a warm compress on them, and remove that, and take care to cure the plague as it is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the narrow (passage).
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the narrow passages are so broken, and if they break, then the fracture is only communicated to the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the divided parts; and it causes great pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stupefied when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is above the fracture which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is in the extremity of it alone, then you bind it according to what appears to you by equalizing the binding until it is assembled to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the loin or has already declined to the lower parts, then you make a plaster over the sick belly until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have bound it, pause on the plaster, and place a pause on that wooden or cotton splint, and strengthen by stricture over which there is no fear of puncture of fracture nor movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And bind the concavity with water that fills it until it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if it causes a hot abscess, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the hot abscess is sedated, and pause on the water that sits over it according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus in a convex shape.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if they are stagnant humors or are communicated, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the adjutator (helper).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutator is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which is that you take a wooden plate of moderate thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And there are two extremities of two ligaments, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a chair; and then he puts his broken arm on the wood until it reaches the tiny end of it in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is annexed.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then it is suspended above some heavy cause, or the minister extends that to the lower parts; and then the doctor says that the fracture is in its places most often, until the fracture returns according to its convex shape.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other manner is that the patient is resupinated on their cervical spine and suspends the hand of the neck with ligament; and then he commands two ministers that one of them holds water above the fracture in its places most often; and the other holds the pus below it; and almost all of them extend to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with ligament and over that with another ligament, and almost all of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is fitting that half of the ligament be placed over the cilium and the other below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow, then it is fitting that the ligament be placed over that place and over that elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Bind it with facilitated and easy handling, and then when it is bound according to its convex shape and is applied for good application, then strengthen it if it does not cause hot abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if it causes hot abscess, then loosen the stricture until the seventh day, and pause on the woolen cloth wrapped in seven layers and oiled roses until the abscess rests, and then you strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the manner of strengthening it is that you put a plaster on the fracture, and then you put a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then you adjust the arm on that adjutator, and put your hand open over the shoulder muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And put the cloth and strengthen on the adjutator the arm so that the arm is in its place of stability, if it does not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then it uses stability.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that which puts on the fracture that stability which is more firm and stronger than the other stabilities; and put between each stability the latitude of the digit, and let the length of the stabilities be according to the breaking with an addition of three digits from all parts.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen on the stabilities with the stricture which I said at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your stricture on the place of the fracture be more straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture has been lengthened according to the minor structure.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you observe the positioning of the stars and the structure likewise as we have said at the hour in which you restore the member to its usual situation, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then place the structure and the stars within the seventh day likewise as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not become inflamed or swollen at the site of the injury; or it is prohibited to bring food to the member by disposition of superfluous structure; and thus rectify all as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Moreover, if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be over the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And apply the warm woolen dressing to the affected area, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the injured member is not distorted or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, thus rectify all in accordance with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And administer the food to the patient according to the order which we have previously mentioned, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; and then cover the food of his.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the warm application and his leg to be strengthened in 40 days; and then it is necessary that they be loosened and bathed and medicated with ointments which rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is badly broken, then you do not loosen the ligament and the stars within a day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm bones; one of them is small and it is the one that supports the hand, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small bone, from the part above.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And sometimes the larger forearm bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller forearm bone is broken below, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone of it is broken below the fracture, the breakage of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm bone below, then it is convenient for the doctor to make a small extension to facilitate its healing.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	Moreover, if the larger forearm bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to make a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forearm bones are broken together, then it is necessary that you make the external treatment even stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary that you make the figure of the hand in such a way that its restoration and extended extension are supported on a cushion, and the pulse of the hand is at the parts below, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger is lower than the other fingers, and the patient should be seated on a wooden chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion placed underneath it in its elevation or inclination, so that the patient does not suffer trouble.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm from the part below to the hand or ligament, and another minister extends similarly from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor sets the bone in place so that it is reduced to its best figure as much as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the breakage of the bone is such that it is dislocated, then you must forcibly reduce all the mass to its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears that the dislocated bone is separated and cannot be reduced by your skill, then you should fix it in place and leave it according to the manner which we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	Moreover, if the fracture is a wound, I have already made a special chapter about it, and thus take its treatment.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if you fear an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and it should be moderate between specification and subtlety, and strengthen the cloth over that with subtle structure until the abscess is calmed; and then remove the cerate and apply an emplaster prepared from powder of mulberry in clear water, and then place the stars; and let the star which is placed on that fracture be fixed firmly and strongly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of the stars of the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one forearm bone or in both bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your structure over the site of the fracture firmly and vigorously, and when more is needed, extend it to the parts above the fracture or to the parts below it, place the structure a little more softly according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture are not very humid, and they do not have any rough or harsh qualities, and it is necessary to strengthen them properly between subtle and gross, just as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Examine the limb and its ligaments for about ten days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if you find some cause for which correction is necessary, then proceed to correct it in the limb, and then try to straighten the limb with warm water until that correction ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unbound until it rests, and then return to re-establishing the structure.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extraction is already softened and the bone is already re-meshed and resembles those, then correct all that with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider it more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of structure, because then try to soften that a little and leave it for several days until it runs towards that nourishment, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not find any cause among those that we have mentioned, then do not try to delay it for about 20 days or around that.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by its virtue of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you will know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or at least it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the fist of the hand and of the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You will know that at the fist of the hand and at the joints of the fingers there is often fracture, and it does not occur to them unless through vigorous and rough movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when fracture or rupture occurs in the hand, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a straight and level path, according to equality, and then pause his hand over that extension.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor joins them together until they are well-conjoined in good conjunction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a bandage, unless an abscess occurs with caution; and then place a star underneath according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth of yours.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the bandage is in the divided parts of the belly of the palm, and then it makes a resemblance of a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with their palm bandaged; then it will be strengthened with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the star of the body is in the cloth in which it is elevated, so that the body is applied to the palm; and strengthen it according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the forward parts, then it is necessary to place underneath a star and another star of the part below on the palm, so that the hand is opened and straightened; and then pause the structure, just as the hand is revolved at the joint between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if fracture occurs at the knuckles of the fingers, then it is the finger joint, which should be joined according to what is necessary and then strengthened in the palm, and if you want, place a small straight beam for supporting, so that the fracture is elevated and not misaligned.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, just as in that of the middle place, or in the index finger, or in the auricular, or in the anular, then it should be joined and tied with the finger joint so that it is fixed; or all the joints are according to continuity, and it is better; or place above a small star, just as we have said in the joint.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscess caution and opposition — in the tie and operation — in what is necessary when any cause among those occurs, according to what is repeated in the narrative of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the hip.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the hip is broken and declared to the sentiment according to what is converted to the part above and to the underlying pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on his back belly and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is close to the root of the hip, then the ligament is propped against the outer part of the pelvis, so that the extension settles in itself, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is close to the outer part, then it should be made with the ligament propped against the outer part, and the extension should be at the lower parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor examines the patient's bones in their joints to see if they are aligned according to natural similarity and if the bones are well-connected for good joint alignment; then he checks if the plaster and structure are properly applied, so that there is no damage to the affected limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	Perhaps there is damage to the affected limb, then you should leave it like that for several days until the inflammation subsides, and then return to your usual care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The structure of it should be made like this: you should wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and double it two or three times, and remove any excess; and then wrap the leg up to the ankle and down to the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long piece of felt between the thigh and leg near the knee joint, and adjust the extremities of the felt to the upper part of the two divisions, and then wrap around the leg and thigh so that it is not too tight or loose with the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then stop on the thigh at the place of that fracture thus, and put a star-shaped bandage over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill in the empty spaces between the leg and thigh with many folds, so that the structure is consolidated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start to build a strong structure around the middle of the fracture site with three or four wraps, and when you have already strengthened the ligaments at the fracture site, your structure should be smaller and lighter and more flexible.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the felt to the lower parts until they reach the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the star-shaped bandages on the other side so that the ligament is not dislocated from its proper place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the structure on that, so that it does not cause corrosion to the affected limb nor apostema nor inflammation and appears similar to those; and if any of these causes occur, then cut away the damaged part, and correct what is wrong, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps the bone is heavy on the part that is painful, then you should adjust it according to what is possible for you; and if not, put a remedy on it and remove what is superfluous, and care for what has preceded the memory until it is healthy.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And several times it is strengthened that fracture of the thigh with another adjustment to the star-shaped bandages, just as we have said in the auxiliary and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Perhaps in the restoration of it, in such a way that it does not cause harm to the limping patient; and if it is restored alone, another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that they limp for a certain time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you know that the thigh is strengthened in 10 days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other disposables.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap of the knee joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that a fracture of the kneecap of the knee joint is very difficult to heal, and perhaps it causes many annoyances.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Perhaps it causes the fracture, then it is not just a crack or hole in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and about that all this has been stated with great sentiment.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is thus that it should be adjusted so that what is broken in its parts is reunited with the pieces until it is aggregated and connected according to what is possible for equilibrium, facilitation, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then stop the plaster and put it around that round star-shaped bandage, if you need it; and strengthen below with a structure suitable for that.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the disposables that we have recommended in other fractures, just as it is apostema and similar to those in which one opposes an accident with what is convenient for it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and it is named fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to some species of fractures that affect both bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of it is made just like the restoration of the arm, by adjusting, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, the leg is converted into the lower parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes trouble below, and it is one of those causes that are not easily cured.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligamentation of the bones according to that adjustment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Perhaps somehow, if the fracture of the leg has many serious complications, that the extension should be milder and more gentle, and it alleviates your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	If in the chamber there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you engage the stitches and complete all the tie of operation, then take measures of fustigation from the palm which was placed beneath the causes that were paused in solitude; and thus the fatness of the branches of the palm will be alleviated, not being grasped by the small groceza, and not being touched by the hand, and it will be the length of those according to the length of the chamber, and of the denudation entering beneath.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop each drap in two enveloping wraps according to its length, and place one on the divided part of the chamber on one side and the other on the other side, and thus from the denudation entering beneath to the lowest location of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then leave the two stitches in three places of both extremities and at the middle place, because in this structure the chamber is prohibited from leaning to the right and left side, and it stands for good stability.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then administer a fustigation of the arm according to the length of the chamber; and it will be placed in the chamber so that it conserves that movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And mainly you should beware that you do not make a fracture, and when you have that plague properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the chamber and study it for later study, and you guard against apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and if some cause of those occurs, then pause and go to what is good for entering into what can be healthy.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	About the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not entirely fracture at all; rather the bones of the foot sometimes fracture in some veins; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and do not break unless there is strong traction in the midst of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot undergo fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient pauses his foot on the prepared earth thus as a help.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then pause one foot on that which is elevated by those bones, and then calcify those, and press, and enclose those so that they turn into their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply an emplaster and stop below, and place beneath the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat plates.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that with the foot in a descending structure, since you have enveloped that with drapes and other causes of which you are inducing.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when it passes three or four days, then you will release the bandage, because you will find the bones set in place, or reset or relocated, and the operation on those is thus as it should be.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	Moreover, if some toes are reset, then restore those, and enclose those thus as you were and recommend to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then pause the reset toe in place according to the length of the toe, and it will be placed there for a little while; and then place beneath the foot this table that you have recommended, and strengthen that with a descending structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	Moreover, if that which is reset of the bones is two or three or more, then you pause on each toe in place according to its quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand upon one of the plates of the table outside the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which I have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have discussed; and pause and go to all the accidents with what is good for healing.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	About the fracture of the hip joint of the woman and of the bone of the perineum and of the vertebrae of the spine.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip joint of the woman is reset, then make that descend in a circular motion, and then incline it to the back of the two small ones, and let it be held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife will support the hip joint from below, and make it in the hip joint of hers thus as a sphere; and then the woman will be concutited, and elevate the back of her small one little by little, because all that is forgotten until it is born on the part of the hip joint thus as a sphere and the reset bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then apply poultices on the back of hers, and when she wants to urinate, remove the bottom with facilitated ease, and reduce and return that according to the manner in which it was mixed at the beginning, and then return to her first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an ovation of egg and strengthen on the trajectory of hers a tube of cane; and insert all the vesicle into her hip joint, and then sufflate in the tube with vertu until the vesicle is inflated within the hip joint, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with cotton and stood for several days according to what has been recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bone of the penis in men or women is bruised, then administer restoration and agility to the water that has been recommended for the bone of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And the water that is not hidden in these close fractures and that few encounter, mostly adds to that which is some study and use and intent of my free motion; because that fracture means you are in major dispositions via direct restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore intent being.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	Moreover, in the wound of the man when it is bruised, take a poultice of water, and put the wound in it; and then pause over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are badly wounded.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for that which suffers a bad fracture, and mostly if the bone is large as well as the bone of the hip or of the joint, or similar to that, so that you take care and remove the fragments as soon as possible if the conditions of removal are favorable to you or testify as we have said before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound flows blood, then it is necessary that you take care to retain it in this way, so that you powder over the wounded place, if no other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if you do not suffer from abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Moreover, if you suffer from a hot abscess, then you delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed down, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth of all, because you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	Moreover, if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered elbow, then it is necessary that you perform to reduce it and bend it among your hands as much as facilitated and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Moreover, if the extension is not prepared for your hands, then you reduce it among your hands as much as possible in this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches and the width of which is according to the quantity of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take hold of these three or four according to the quantity that indicates for it in the cure of all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be rounded, and let it be in a small groove so that it is not doubled over itself during the operation hour.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it be of sharp extremity to which the margin is in the six extremities; and let the underside of it be thick and tending towards the middle, and of its greatness within the partitions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that it is necessary to pause the extremity of the sharp elevated above the extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and let it be bent into some equilibrium.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then it is necessary to bend the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the broken extremity is subtle, and you do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Moreover, if you cannot reduce the bone in all that we have recommended, then insert it in all that is convenient for the bones of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner it is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then scrape that which remains on the bone of roughness and of small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and then reduce the reduction to the patient with vehement pain ledent, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that because you confer great judgment to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is completed, which you do to the bone, and then submerge in a vi stooping black cloth, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the soft wound or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not make the bone fragile and corrupt.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stitches in the hour of the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the uncovered wound in such a way that you insert the thread among forks and uses of wrappings according to the quantity of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And beware that you do not strengthen the wound on the fracture, because many vain efforts are made by foolish doctors, and they cause death or corrupting mortification or rottenness, so it is sanity.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the structure of the tieu is loose, soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the plague is great or bad, and you fear about that evil accident which has been recounted, and there is pain in the area, then do not cover it with those astellas, but rather make an envelope of thick, rough bandages around the area and strengthen it.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When you have already begun to treat the plague once or twice a day, which has engendered heat, then remove the bandage that you had placed over the affected area in the morning, and administer cooling remedies, following our customary practice of treating plagues, just as we do with tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the plague in any morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and cover the member so that it is prepared in such a way that the pus can flow out of it easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague has passed many days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from the arm, then you know that here are signs of small ulcers because they cover the plague in tents.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those ulcers, those that are separated remain and extract, those that are not separated and touch the member and cause pain, therefore try to incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you find that the plague is stagnant or ulcerous, it is symptoms of corruption and putrefaction, then cover one of those which is convenient for the cure of which the preceding narration was made in the seventh chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that which covers the worst sermon and you make present your patience: when the gross is truncated, emollients are placed over the member just like the bones of the thigh and of the hip and similar to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction from it, nor the extraction of it four times a day, lest it kills; having laid aside that which prevents, because strong fire perishes if it is treated for 20 days or 30. And then you will cure the plague if you have seen it, and if not, lay aside that one.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the cure of numbness that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this numbness occurs in the vicinity of a healthy fracture, and it increases because it is close to the joints, and it is hindered by the figure of the member; and strongly prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the numbness is recent and administer in those medicines that have been stipulated, such as aloen, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar to those; in order that you take some of those or all, and mix them so they are stipated with wine, or album of water, or with good agreement, and place it over the numbness in a stop, and constrict them over it for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the extrication that does not dissolve it for many days; and then dissolve it and iterate another, until the numbness is removed; or strengthen over that lamina of lead decentment, because lead has the property of removing all that which is inflated in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Moreover, if the numbness has already been converted into stone and is strengthened and necessitates provoking ostensible contradiction, and then you should divide it by the superior part of the limb, and incise the superfluous and eminent, or cut away that which is in the way until it is removed; and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then Roman law governs the subtle member and frees it according to its own natural nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of bone is restored, and then Roman law governs the subtle member and frees it, then that is not done except for many causes: one of which is the multitude of solution of the liament and of the ligature of the faulty joint according to what is convenient; or for superfluity of structure of the liaments until the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its hour; or for paucity of health in the body of the patient and for debility of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of that is to give food to the patient and make their heart tender until the health is multiplied in them; and administer bath; and put gauze and lettuce over it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continues embrocation with water and tepid, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the cure of truncated bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of their own which is convenient.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you find the member already restored to health from tortuousness and eminence to the truncated bone and numbness, and it is for that fededa in the form of the member, but meanwhile the member is not prohibited from its own natural operation, then it does not cover that you receive the speech of one who existed before that member was newly truncated.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	More skilled doctors have set forth remedies and restorers which they have made available in our land; and this operation is most detestable, producing great fear of the sign of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If stiffness and numbness are recent, then it is believed that they are imbued with watery humor in which they are softened by mollifying herbs, and thus they are like fuels of high altitude and roots of the same, and milky, and similar to those; and it should be made into an emplaster of mollifying emplaster, thus making a good dissolution; or that it is taken from the mucilage of the root of the high altitude and is mixed with grey clay of gaulin or oil of cirami, and is emplastered there; or that they take fat figs and are trussed in the wombs of columns, and similar to those of the medicines which are named as consolidating remedies.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some wounds are dissolved by continuous friction of the ligature which is in the most humid places, and administration of movement to the entire limb should be done at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If twisting has gone downwards and is made strong and converted into stone and provoked the need for cure with iron, then it is believed that the pus above has ceased and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and something is inserted that suppresses the nodosity of those metacarpals in the bone in subtle incisions, and administration of facilitation is done in that which is solicited and studied.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On ulcers in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is a slipping out of some of the joints in their proper place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the shape of the limb is distorted, and it brings about great pains and lesions.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when accidents happen to some dislocation, then it is necessary to perform reduction as soon as possible, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes apostematous and very strong in what was done, making difficult the reduction of dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is necessary that it not be touched nor stretched at the time of apostema, because many weak points come to bring about spasm and sharp pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when that happens, then it is necessary to apply yourself to the flaubotomy of the affected part, and thereby let it rest until the apostema subsides; and thereby the limb should be wrapped in warm water and oil, and thereby reduction is facilitated.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the whole limb should be cared for with that of which the memory will come back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the cure of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Thus the two jawbones are dislocated if they do not close; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places with little movement, and thus mollified a little; or they are entirely dislocated and completed, until they are mollified at the part of the joint until corroding saliva of the affected part and it cannot hold that nor clear its mouth, and its tongue is enveloped in its speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of it is slight, then in major preparations it returns by itself for a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it is necessary that reduction of it be administered immediately, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister holds the head of the affected part, and meanwhile puts his fingers on one side of the jaw in the root of the dislocation of the lower jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of one side; or he puts both fingers simultaneously, if the dislocation is of two sides, and the other fingers are placed on the most affected parts; and he orders the patient to cease using his jaws and release them from any part; and the minister guides the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its proper place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jawbones are simultaneously dislocated, then administration of evaporation with warm water and oil is necessary, until the reduction of both is made easier and not delayed at all, thus as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And thus when they return and are guided, and the mouth of the affected part is closed and not mollified, then pause on those pillows of drap in cerote, and it should be made with wax and oil rubbed; and thereby it is facilitated by means of soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be steady between two aurelhes, so that he does not move to the right or left side; and do not force him to eat for any reason; having the healthy diet forbidden, until when the pains are removed and the jawbones are numb, then it is possible to do what one wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered easily, and do not struggle over the perception of the mouth's opening, eating and drinking, until the jaw is numb and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any time and they are not converted to their proper places, then many vigorous febrile efforts should be made, and strongly heated soda should be applied, and the patient's belly should be strongly wrapped, and the patient should vomit pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, then you will know it is a loss; and many vigorous efforts will die in that which falls within 10 days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The ankle is not dislocated from its joint behind the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated forward, and that is declared by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is when the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then bind the area with your palm in strong binding, so that it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then pause on that plaster and poultices and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of one who has a hernia and is continued in it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and reset according to what we have said and according to what you have prepared.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on that plaster, and poultices, and extraction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this method of cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its proper place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated upwards towards the thigh and downwards.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not dislocated to the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front parts through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and falls to the lower parts from the thigh, and mostly in those whose flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those whose flesh is thick, it is difficult to dislocate.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And strongly it is necessary to apply percussion or massage to some men, and the patient's muscle is affected by a hot poultice, and it is seized by that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you proceed with that until you are certain about the condition of the patient, and then you will proceed with their cure.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is recognized the dislocation of it when it is in the lower parts from the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound one, because you find among them diverse manifest differences; and you find in the head of the concave muscle below the thigh from the touching of the head of the muscle as if it were a vacuum, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to their proper position, nor can they do that for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the foot or above, then you will find a clear touching point, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the assistant raises the hand of it to the upper parts; and then pauses with his fingers below the patient's thigh, and strengthens the joint in its proper place, and the assistant raises the hand of it, and extends it upwards; and then pauses it there until it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return through what we have said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurs, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered a gentle massage that softens and relaxes, as if it were a coytz root of fenugrec, and melillot in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and paused below the thigh, waiting for the moment when it is settled between levitation and strictness, and then the doctor pauses his hand on the patient's spine, and raises the head of the muscle to a straight position, and attracts the patient's hand so that it is not bent towards the lower parts, and another assistant holds the patient's head, so that it is not bent towards the lower parts, because it will quickly return to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce it in this way: and it is that you should be present as a helper to the patient who is more elongated than the patient, and stand on the side of that joint, and insert your hand below the patient's thigh and raise their thigh to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand from the lower parts of the back.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is lighter, then it is necessary that I cover what I have suspended for another cause, so that the heavy one returns quickly, because the dislocation returns soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced immediately according to another method: and it is that one fixes on the ground a long stick with a rounded figure, like a pestle, which is neither large nor subtle, and places it under the patient; then, having placed the stick over the head of the stick, the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and then extends their hand to the other side of the part; and one strengthens the body on the other side with force, because the joint returns to its own place with velocity.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the quantity which is in length of two arm's lengths, and its width is of four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted on the edge of the thigh according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place it over the rounded head, tied with strong bands, so that the stick does not escape from the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place it under the thigh of the patient, and extend the hand or arm over the stick into the other side, and tie the stick to the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a ladder of steps according to the width, and the hand is extended to the other side, and the other body is suspended from the other part, so that the joint enters soon.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is completed according to whatever method is possible for you, and then it is necessary that you pause under the thigh a bandage of wool in equal quantity; and then prepare an emplaster made from powder of moly and album of egg white over all the muscle, so that it is revolved from above, and then strengthen below the thigh with decent structure; and the ligament is revolved over the emplaster, and the hand of it is attached to the neck of it, and it is left, and do not move the hand of it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary that the food of the patient be paused for a little while, until the member is comforted, because it is lighter at the healing of it.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food is given in greater quantity, and one exercises some movement; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that accumulates in it or for another cause, then it is necessary that a cautery be administered with three tractions, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and seven days are spent dissolving the ligament and the joint is not strengthened, and the emplaster and structure are reduced on some occasions, and it is not strengthened and cannot be elevated to the parts above, then you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already inscribed or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will never be fixed in its own place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of that which is made from the foot and the thigh or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another structure is administered to it, and it is cured until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it accumulates towards the healing of the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses many baths until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially from the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it falls below the vein or below the touch according to some figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, this is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the corresponding muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary that you hasten, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to a critical point, because if it comes to a critical point, difficult is the reduction of it, and far from being fully healed; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocation, and of major pain, and many times it leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that its hand is extended with two hands, and its arm is expanded, and the hands of the metge are placed over the hip and below it, and the fingers of its own hands grasp the joint, or in the palm of its own hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then return it thus that doubles the hand on its own, until it strikes the elbow at the wrist of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a strong and forceful extension and movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same thing with two ministers so that it is not removed during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then revolve the arm from its entire part, since it is enveloped by a double layer of cloth over his hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, until that oil is applied so that it facilitates the causes that help in lubricating the joint and facilitating it; and then strongly massage the joint with a vigorous push until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of his hip that is placed on that plaster in which it is stiffened and constrained by a wrapping of egg whites, and it is strongly bound with a descending structure, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is dislocated; and so if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you loosen his bandage and leave it like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for several days until it is strengthened; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it happens that gravity affects the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidity in bath and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or place on the affected joint a compress of warm grass; and then bind it, and leave it like that over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put him in a bath; and when he sweats, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat it over the affected area, so it is rounded by motion, one time, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in a warm bath, until it is relaxed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place on that warm and humid wrapping with a bandage and strongly bind it over that; and do it several times, because it is humid and reduces to its proper disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder of the hand sometimes gets dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is slower, and on the contrary it is for other joints, especially because it is necessary to have velocity in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, provided that the place is apostematized or that it falls into an apostemic hollow.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends his hand, and the doctor places his hand or his palm over the vicinity of the joint, and strongly presses it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Especially because it is necessary to consider if the palm has been placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that one should be intrinsically over the table, so that the doctor's hand falls upon that vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And then it returns soon, good; and if not, then strongly bind it with plaster, closing the apostema and leave it like that; and do not touch it, because if not, it does not suffer nor can it be placed over the reduction of it, since it passes to its days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Especially the joint is bent according to its twisting; and do not notice any cause in the patient, except that the hand is mollified and cannot hold anything; then you know that the nerves are pinched or torn, and then it is not engendered in it unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the sake of its treatment and fortifying its confidence.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the shoulder is returned, then place on it the plaster that we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and then loosen it and leave it, and the hand of it should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Especially if the movement of it is stopped and gravity affects it, then apply that with warm water and friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the cure of dislocation of the toes.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Several times it happens that the toes are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a toe is dislocated from among those on the back of the palm or on the belly of it, then straighten the toe and strongly press the dislocation of it with the toes placed together, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And you should suspend that and extend it inward so that it may be straightened in its own time.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When night falls, follow that sequence according to the narrative, and do not cease to relieve it during the day and exercise gentle movement, and place it at night; and do this for several days until it is strengthened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similarly there, if it is dislocated in the stomach area, and place it at that part and do the first operation there, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do there when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When complete dislocation occurs at one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and many vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no cure, because death catches up with the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And it is said that the evacuation of the patient is beyond their will, and they cannot retain it; and many weakened parts of their body, or two legs of theirs, or two arms of theirs, or one of those; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, because many weakened parts are displaced and many weakened parts make the removal of those to four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that has been removed to the back parts and is called paraplegia.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of it is that then you should consider if the paraplegia occurs from weakness, because then there is no cure nor complete healing.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Moreover, in this case, they went through experimentation or percussion or similar methods, just as the Ancients did with various ways of treatment, which I will return to profit; however, I have already abbreviated from that which I have little excuse for, due to my proximity to the intention, with which I have exposed and formed diverse instruments, in order to show and expound on it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in paraplegia which occurs from the part below the feet, there is no healing nor cure for it; and similarly, in this case, it is done to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, there is no cure except for the one that occurs on the back itself, as I have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their bed near a wall, and should be extended below with many pillows, so that the feet are not lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed near the head of the patient, and another stick in the air above their feet on the other side of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And one minister should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the head of the patient and below the small linen bandages firmly; and extend the end of the linen to the stick which is above the head of the patient, and place it on them; and tie the other linen bandage around their thighs at the knees, and above their legs; and adjust all the linen bandages and place them on the other stick which is above their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should carefully extend the linen to the part of the stick, and do not displace the two sticks and the linen bandages from their places where they are fixed, but rather hold them firmly as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place their palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns to its place, or should place them on a table, and adjust the patient's feet on the table until they return to their proper position.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Moreover, if it does not return to its place through this method, then take a table of which the width or length is in the air at three arms' distance, and hollow out a hole in the wall where we have said that the patient should be placed with their extremity on the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the flat surface of the table on the vertebrae, and the doctor should place their feet on the other extremity, and pull strongly until the vertebra is straightened and returns to its proper position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open what is twisted in the back; and it is that you should place on the ground above the head of the patient at the end of the bed two sticks, the length of which is one arm, and above their head at the end of the bed two sticks likewise; and let the length between each stick be a palm, and already it has been done in each stick where the cord turns, and each should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a single stick rotating where the twist is, and let it be turned in the two tracks of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the extremity of it there is a track in which the stick is formed, the length of which is a palm where it is twisted; and in the two other sticks it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the linen bandages that have been stretched on the feet of the patient in the track where it is above their head, and the linen bandages that have been stretched on their thighs in the twist where it is above their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then apply a certain turn and stay in a minister who turns the turn with his hand, and the doctor will bend the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the shape of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then because the spine is returned, and the area is bent, then cover with a plaster made of albumen of egg, and stop; and place over the plaster like a table of which the width is three fingers or around that, and the length of it is as much as takes up the space of the gouty swelling, and above the division of the spine there.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be relaxed in the ligament which we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of nutrients until it is healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains some impediment in the area at the end of the healing, then cover so that medicines are administered which mollify and loosen in administration on the table for long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a thin layer of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some fallen vertebrae are impeding the back of the spine of the back, and it is customary for that dislocation; and it is that bone which you have already mentioned so that no cover is made with that medicine, because very strong force will make you fall to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the cure of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not come together except by dislocation only, and they do not impede there where they impede in other small joints with movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front parts or to the back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation of it to the inner parts is this, when you adjust the leg of the healthy side with the affected leg, it is then longer and the knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the affected leg cannot bend its knee towards the groin, and it is the place where the knee joint is apostematized by a postulate apostem, so that the head of the thigh bone has arrived here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which impedes dislocation is to the outer parts, it is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that which impedes dislocation to the front parts is this: it expands the leg according to its natural measure, but meanwhile it does not bend that knee which has pain in the knee, and if you force it to walk and it cannot do so on the front parts; and its urine is retained and its knee joint is apostematized, and its ambulation is on the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that which impedes dislocation to the back parts is this: it does not expand the knee, nor can it bend that knee which bends the joint, and its leg is shorter than the other, and its knee joint is mollified, and the head of the thigh bone is at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been antiquated with what you have administered reduction to it and returned according to its disposition, then it is not in that complete cure; and therefore it does not cover that there should be made a profound impression in that.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Moreover, in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you will be able to reduce it to its place, and extend it to the inner parts and to the outer parts, and move it to the right and left, because very strong force returns it and does not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of the affected part below, or with its hands, or with the ligament which is relaxed over the leg below the knee; and another minister extends the hand of that one upwards so that it reaches the affected parts below the knee joint; and then strengthen the ligament over the head of the thigh bone, and hold another minister to straighten the extremity of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And its extension is either from the inner part to the knee joint at the part of the hip, or from the back part to the part of the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And its extension is all those in a single direction until the affected part is elevated above the level of the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that we speak of in their own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inner parts, it is necessary that the affected part be resupinated above the knee joint; and then pause the ligaments on the head of the thigh bone in that place where between the head of the thigh bone and the place below the knee joint; and then extend the ligament from the part of the knee joint to the outer part of the hip.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another strong minister grasps their arms, and presses the large area of the patient's thigh and extends to the parts before to extend violently, because that returns to its usual place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	At this stage, it is necessary to apply a lighter cure, in which the member is reduced so that other species are not affected.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused above you and does not obey the entrance at this stage of cure, then it is necessary that both feet of the patient are bound together strongly, lightly, above the ankles and below the toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each part be according to the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the patient be suspended over the head of the bed, and that it be in a massage; and let the length of it from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And let a strong youth command that he supports the head of the thigh, and be suspended with the patient another youth, and the other youth supports the thigh in strong empowerment, so that the joint returns to its usual place with velocity.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation to the part before, it is necessary that the patient lies on a soft seat according to what we have recommended in having gelbozitated; and let the ligament be strengthened over the patient's leg properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And let two stools be placed, one at their feet, and the other at the head; and let two adjusted stools be placed on the middle of the fixed bridge above which drips humidities are enveloped, so that the patient is not damaged by the stool being between their thighs, so that the extension to the parts below is not attracted.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And let each minister extend to their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if it obeys to reverberation, it will be grand; and if not, pause over that diligently and thus we have spoken in gelbozitation for that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lies on his usual bed quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the parts below, then it is necessary that the leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative method on the bridge; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's loin, and also cuts with the other hand, and in this cutting pause, he extends to the parts below to the part of the ankle.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the parts behind, then it is not necessary that the patient's leg be extended to the parts below, and it is elevated above the ground; but it is necessary that it be placed on a hard surface, thus as it is necessary for the healing if their ankle is dislocated to the parts before, according to what we have said about the setting of it on two ankles; and it is above its face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no danger.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary that compression be administered on the table above the area where the joint swells.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, since the reduction is completed as it is necessary — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient stretches out their usual leg and expands those excuses, then you know that the member has returned as it is necessary — and then you adjust both thighs and place them in a bandage and stretch out to an end so that the ankle is not hidden in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And let the ligament be loosened and the bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those joints in establishment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and replace it, and stretch it out according to its first structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And let that be loosened, and make that wait in ambulation about several days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the cure of dislocation of the ankle.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated to the parts before, and to the parts behind, and to the parts below more than the parts behind; and to the parts above it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that it commands the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is to make the patient straight, thus that it extends its usual leg, if possible; bind the two thighs to the face of it, and place their foot between the two thighs; and let the ankle be bound with your two palms, and hold those between the two fingers above the ankle in strength, and another minister extends the usual foot until the ankle returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	It seems that the patient's thigh is what adheres to their hip, elevating it without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to that and bind the thigh to the hip, and then tie those in a bandage for three or four days, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's walking ability for several days, until they are healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension in the ligaments which are involved in the cure of the preceding ankle narration.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some ankle joints are reduced by small reduction, and some are dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made at the internal or external parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that the ankle becomes swollen preceding the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure of its reduction is by gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with facilitated massage and kept in place until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure of it when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary to make the patient straight, and hold that one firmly and strongly with the back of their hand at the middle place of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you put your right hand to straighten the foot on the upper most part, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the place of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left hand for two fingers, and then extend with the left hand; and push the foot's toes towards the hip, making the thigh struggle.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make two finger movements according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot's toes towards the hip at the third finger, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one finger or in two according to this manner, and if the foot is well-placed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then make the patient sit on the floor, and stretch a bandage strongly on the ground, and place it between their thighs, and you have enveloped it around the drap so that the patient does not move.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the servant holds their thighs, and another servant extends the foot with their hands or with ligaments that lie on the neck of the foot; and then extend each servant against the extension of the seat, and the bandage is extended between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body of the patient does not move to the lower parts, away from its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another servant holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns with facilitation.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause the plaster and strongly extend that in the ligaments, and bind the foot with ligaments to the hip.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And it is necessary to take care or guard against the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the ligament on that does not become violent and holds it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, extend it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is forgotten to go to that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation does not dissolve and corrupt, and then it does not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you reach the postema wound, then it is necessary that you administer in the Cedacio of it, which our narration has preceded, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is reduced.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that what is dislocated be reduced with little extension and effort; and because it is not difficult, it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient sit on a low bench or on a table, and be steady thus as if one were going.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on feet, and pause the foot on what is minimal of the joints, and then calcify that in the foot until it returns, and you see that already reduced and does not appear at the eminent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then pause below the belly of the foot on a table that takes all the foot, which has two caps, and then strengthen that in structure decently and firmly for three days; and then remove it and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that are caused by a blow or a fracture or some other accidents.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you encounter any of these causes, and you persevere in the cure of it and in the restoration of health, many rapid successes will avert death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason no one should presume to cure it, unless he is skilled in the art, with long experience, merciful and pitiful, slow, not hasty or presumptuous; and who uses in the commencement of medicines that calm the inflamed parts, and alleviates the patient's divine judgment, hoping for salvation from destruction, and for the alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then it is necessary to remove as much as possible from the commencement of the cause, so that the inflamed part does not become worse.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns to its natural state, then administer a regimen that calms the inflamed part and cures the wound with what is convenient for the limb, according to the dictates of the learned authorities.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and you encounter separated bones, then you perform the reduction of them, and do in this case what we have said about simple dislocations that occur in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument of terror in the ways of fear, as it has preceded my preaching; for it is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthy to your body, which truly exists in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus end the paragraphs of Albucasim, perfectly filled with those which God may bless.
Amen.	Amen.
