Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The words of Albucaisim begin here.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since I have now completed this book for you, which is the final part of the science of medicine, and since its completion has reached its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it appears to me that you should understand and possess this treatise, which is a part of my operation, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Therefore, my operation is now laid to waste in our region and in our time, completely private, so that little by little the science of it has been forgotten, and its vestige remains hidden; and there remained no more than some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been corrupted and distorted through errors and obscurity, until the intentions of it are closed up and its force and art are elongated.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you should revitalize that ancient order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and in order that I may show you the forms of the instruments of cauterization and other tools of the work as they should be used, adding explanation and preparing them, which is a necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why no good craftsman is found who has his own hand in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and it requires the one who will act in front to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew well, so that he could know the joints of the members and their shapes, and their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their arrangement; and of pulsing veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their effluent.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore Hippocrates says that with no name is a movement, but in the work small, and most of all in the art of hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said about this in the introduction to this book; for one who is not knowledgeable in anatomy, as we have told you, will not be exempt from falling into error which will cause men's deaths, just as I have seen many of them, because some are formed in this science and seek to get ahead without true knowledge or experiment.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had inflicted an abscess on the throat of a woman, and he had cut some arteries in her throat so that great blood flowed and the woman died between those present.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who took out an abscess from a man whose state he had examined, and the abscess was large, and it came to him and removed that abscess with a piece of his bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you yourself had predicted that it would be fatal to remove it, and I saw that due to the greatness of the abscess and the patient's condition, he knew it would kill him.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received pay from a duke of our land for surgery, and he undertook to suture the wound on a blacksmith's leg which had been fractured; and the doctor, with his ignorance, removed the fracture, placing it above the wound, with splints and sticks under strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he loosened the stitches according to his own desires, and then he removed the splints, and then he allowed it to be left for some days and commanded that we loosen the bandage; and thus it became so that the leg and foot were apostemated, and it led to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you were called to him, and he was prepared to loosen the bandage, and as a result, there was calmness and an end to his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But meanwhile corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained and ceased to walk, spreading corruption in the member until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and caused it to ulcerate within a few days, until the malice of it magnified with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cancerous part is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not need to be removed completely, but rather it should be left in the member which suffers and is fully hostile.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that my operation be divided into two parts: one is in the operation associated with health, and the other is in the work where there is danger in the greater dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in this place throughout this book, where I described the operation in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you that you guard this and avoid that, so that foolish ones do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your own arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your own patients with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way with the grace of God, to preserve health and to obtain blessed success, and abandon terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and keep your own arms from this which makes you fear, so that your situation remains in your faith and in your name does not escape: because it is more remaining at your glory, and further in the world and in eternity at your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen already said this in certain of his own writings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Don't treat a bad disease, lest you become a bad doctor."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and first, the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter, ordered according to the head and its members, in the forms of instruments and the furnishings of cauterization, and from this it is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on suction cups, and on wounds, and on the extraction of splinters and similar things, entirely chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of torsion and similar things; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and according to the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauterization with fire and acute medicine, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that one begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	You should know the quality of the joints of that cauterization and the inconveniences of it, and in what condition it is forbidden to cauterize.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the joints of cauterization and its inconveniences is a long and prolix discourse, subtle by science, and secret veiled; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and for me it is sufficient to draw from their sermons a small part, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization conforms to all conditions universally, which is in material or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions contrary to their matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and withered condition of material, it desiccate; for some would say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others would say the opposite of that, that cauterization is not suitable in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, for nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a withered and dry disease, with water that is hot and dry, should be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he says that which is the opposite of that, that through cauterization it is made joint in all withered and dry disease that is found in the bodies of men, for when you compare the human body and its moistures to the condition of fire, you find the human body cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say through the sermon of that, that experiment is here already revealed to me several times in discovering.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But it is not necessary for me to come back on this again, since it has already been dealt with and exercised in the chapter on cauterization, and I have become acquainted with the diversity of human conditions and the disposition of diseases in their respective forms, and their causes, and the accidents that occur in them, and the span of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other conditions, there is no fear for you, and especially in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors have agreed on these, and are not discordant in the joints about cauterization in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that from the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and its goodness, it is more on cauterization with medicine combined, because the fire is simple, whose action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized, nor does it harm another member adjusted to it, only with a small drawback.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of medicine combined extends to those members which are far away from it, and very quickly brings disease with difficult healing and great suffering to that member.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except that it superfluously causes; and it is already known to us through experiment and long-standing service in studying the art, based on the truth of the causes. And therefore I am excused from the length of my sermon. If it were not for the fact that this secret hidden by fire has not been read in a better book, and the quality of its operation in the body and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, with a philosophical demonstration speech, which would be sharp in your chests.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they are out of accord with the time in which it is suitable to perform cauterization and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at any time, for the harm caused by time accidents is submerged in the joint of what is attracted to the cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fierce, which do not suffer from tardiness because it is feared of those who come with malice, which is greater than small harm entering through the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus it is not in your chests, or sons, that this is estimated by only the common people and foolish doctors, for it is true that at that disease which is cured by cauterization, there is no reduction of time, and pause from the consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it is, for cauterization is nothing but a place of medicine that alters the condition and dries out the humors which are the cause of why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But meanwhile, cauterization is superfluous over medicine by the will of its virtue and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his disease will return at some hour of time, according to the condition of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of what is prepared in the body of what is accumulated in him from the superfluities, and what has been acquired through food and similar causes; but if the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a few superfluities and humors, just like cauterization for toothache and similar pains, it is possible that this pain will not return to him, but rather it will be reduced in small measure.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is also said in plain speech that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a dreadful saying, not according to what they understand in it, because I believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine or any other cause that approaches cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine only when one administers the methods of cure for certain diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and in the end of the cause, one administers cauterization, and it profits from that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And I conclude here that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand the common people and many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said the ancients that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cauterization does not matter, as if it were absolutely true, for I have already proved and discovered that it does not matter at all, except in certain bodies, and that cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron, just as they said; but however, when you do cauterization with fire on gold, it is not declared to you, for it is hidden according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you place over it ignition, the gold melts in the fire, and some plates are formed so that the artisan can see through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore it is made necessary to perform cauterization with iron in a way that is lighter and more precisely according to the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those from head to foot, so that the demanding person can easily get what they want from here.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterization for headaches caused by coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization conquers the humidity and coldness in the serving of accidents which has two causes, one being the cause of soda and the multitude of rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and flowing with sleepiness, toothaches, and yawning, and universally all disease that comes through coldness, just like paralysis, sodality, apoplexy, and similar diseases in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: first, I command the patient to be evacuated with lactative medicine, clearing the head, for three or four nights, according to what the disease requires and the age and habit of the patient.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make that shape between the hairs on his back, sitting on a well-cushioned bench, and placing his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the razor's edge at the tip of your nose, between the eyes, and place it on the skin.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But meanwhile, when the time has come from the middle location is accomplished, mark that location with a tent, and then ignite the olive cauterization of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause that on the marked location with the tent, in a way that it descends, and by which my own hand is slightly constricted little by little, and you turn that around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then raise your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see already that some quantity of bone has been uncovered from the skull, like the amount of grain of errors, hours elevate your hand, and if not return your hand with that iron, with another similar to it, if it is chilled, until what I have told you is visible.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the location and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause over it with a cloth wrapped in a border and let it be over there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the location with a four-fold medicine, until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that as long as the wound remains open, so much the better is the cauterization, because it is more effective and beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the tongue should be cauterized into the bone, and the cauterization should be kept until some part of the specificity of the bone is absorbed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it will be cleared what is adhered to the bone, and then it will be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cauterization it will come to the last, until it presses into the bone with great force, until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little aphicate:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they consider that from that location the vapors of the head will be expelled.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And it should be kept open for a long time, and then it will be cured when it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But to me, these two species of cauterization are not visible at all, except in some men according to the way of fear; and leaving that aside, I consider it better for health when it is; because the head has been revealed by the dissolution of continuity, just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a frightful nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cauterization is more saved and better for me; and from that house and with that work, salvation comes.
Capitol segon.	The second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the Cauterization of the Head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain, and it is prolonged in the patient, and they use various remedies such as wars and cochias and capipurges and emplausters and guats and cadels and gualinas and similar things, and especially if already cauterized with one cautery which does not respond and does not benefit at all from any of those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frightful and finds no great fear, then that cauterization should be done with another cautery, leaving a little bit between.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that over the horn of one's head with a cautery until the tongue is parted.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the tongue and let it be discovered the quantity which we have recounted, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the rear part of the head at the location called "vas", -- and it is that location where the windpipe is paused.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in that way, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient through this will experience great pain of a different kind than all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you will say this cautery in its place, because it is necessary to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput with a more subtle cautery than that which is cauterized at the middle location of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	The third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Cauterization for Migraine that is not Ancient.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the patient in the part of the head feels a dull pain, or it is spread into the eye, let the head be evacuated with medicines that clear the mind, and let another cure be administered, which I have said in the divisions of diseases; and if none of these things help, then cauterization is done in two ways: either with medicine combined with acute remedies, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cauterization with medicine combined is that you take a piece of aloes, and scrape it off and cut off the extremities of both heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the location of the pain in the temple with a well-made razor until it forms a spot behind the tongue, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then press on it with a stopper for a constant constriction, and let it be for the space of three hours; and then remove the aloes and treat the wound for two or three days, and then pause over it with a cloth wrapped in a border until the spot becomes dry.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with a four-fold medicine until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some combined medicines that I have written in the two treatises on combined medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But cauterization with iron, according to this method: ignite with the cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus shaped like a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle location of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then pause over the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that the iron is not too hot to be left there - and slowly turn the iron little by little with velocity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is absorbed by the specificity of the tongue is like the majority of it, and lift your hand in order that the artery is not absorbed which is left behind, so that a flow of blood does not come.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then wrap the cloth in water and salt and pause it over the location, and let it be for three days; and then pause with a mulled cloth wrapped in border, and then cure with four-fold medicine until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the extremity of the cutlery according to the cautery, and be careful not to incise an artery in this non-ancient migraine properly.
Capitol quart.	The fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On Cauterization for Ancient Migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure the migraine with that which we have said about the previous cure, and that which we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the cure does not help, and sometimes by the disease it is not enough to do what we have said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then you must ignite the cutlery cautery until it becomes white, so that you mark the location of the pain with a line of length which is the majority of the finger, or where it is; and pause your hand for one moment and press that in to incise the artery and bring it into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the jawbone, which is disturbed by mastication, and that the ligament is not inflamed and the nerves which are connected to it are not affected, and that there is no spasmodic deviation.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is on the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing and has no experience or skill; and leave the operation to begin.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come with a recollection of the regulation of blood flow accidental to the artery according to your own method in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and you see the patient's body is tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle location of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on stricture of artery with two cauteries, and it is better and more convergent.
Capitol .v.	The fifth chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On Cauterization for Earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to heat and it is cured by lactative causes and by another cure which I have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then ignite the cautery, and this is called "puncta", of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then, the puncta is brought to the ignition, and it should be guided around the entire ear like a wheel is revolved, or in the circuit of each sample if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen yourself with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little, so that you sense the location with intent.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery is applied to all points in the entire ear, and each one, and then cure the locations until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	The sixth chapter.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On Cauterization for Torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and with cautery is not but of the species which come through flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that occurs due to dryness or spasmodic contraction of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of torture with jellies and capipurgis and guarguarisms, and your cure does not provide relief, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one on the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery on the contrary side of the affected part, because softening only occurs in the part that appears to be healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cautery is that you cauterize with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, slightly above the horn of the head, and on the temple another one, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the specificity of the tongue has been consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutlary, the form of which is before us.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however, more subtle is that it must be done as you see; and it is necessary to cut off in excess of superfluous gristle a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the location with water that is before us, until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	The seventh chapter.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On Cauterization for Ancient Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with the water that we have said and your medicine does not provide relief, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and with one cautery in the middle location of the head, just as we have said; and with one cautery in the cranium.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And already it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is more posterior; and then it should be cured with water that proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	The eighth chapter.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On Cauterization for Oblivion caused by Flux.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient in the beginning large jellies and pills that serve as mind-clearing remedies.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then remove the head of the patient and pause on the cranium of it an ointment described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause it for several times, because that is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of the method which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore, if through these he is fully healed; and otherwise, then ignite three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descendants of the uppermost part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery the length of the thumb, and then cure the cautery with water that has been proceeded.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to add more and the patient is tolerating it well, then ignite one cautery in the middle location; and if you wish for even greater addition, then cauterize that over both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And then cure that until it is healed; and be the cautery olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	The ninth chapter.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It is necessary that you proceed with the softening of the head with jellies and water as we have said; and then remove the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one in the middle location of the head, one on all the horns of the head, one on the rear part of it, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body of many and the patients are tolerating it well, but the disease is strong, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally one cautery into the code of the tongue, and lift up your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that until it is healed, and this is olive-shaped cauterization.
Capitol .x.	The tenth chapter.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On Cauterization for Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized the epilepsy, but that epilepsy is caused by flux.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is necessary to soften the brain of him at the beginning with jellies and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarisms and mastigatories that serve as mind-clearing remedies, before this for several days, with goodification of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then remove the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous method, and another one on the back of the head, and over each horn of the head, it is cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize it with cauteries which I say, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And be olive-shaped according to what has been previously said.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause with a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	The eleventh chapter.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterization for Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are humid and corrupted and flux is great, then cauterize it with the cauteries which we have said in having paralyzed.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that softens the brain of him according to what has proceeded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then remove the head of the patient, and then make a tortoise-shaped figure, done from it over the circle, and then place that in the middle location of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be seated comfortably, and held by all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then pause with a liniment; and it is more worthy of an old sheep's border.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm him over the fire by tempered heat, to his liking, which he suffered when it was more in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle location of his head on the circle, and let it be there until he is warmed up.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient for seven days, once a day, with another regimen of it good until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to what is most in him, so that you hold your hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then pause with a cloth wrapped in linen or grey wool.
Capitol .xii.	The twelfth chapter.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On Cauterization for Water that Descends into the Veins.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the veins through the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens the head of him, and guard that from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to rub his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if there is the beginning of water in two veins, or of one side if there is the beginning of water in one vein.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Insert with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the code; and be the cauteries in that length, in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see blood flows from him, stop them with some medicine that is to your ability.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will gain wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries and in the absorption of those and caution against blood flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the vertebrae below two bones with two cauteries gradually produced.
Capitol .xiii.	The thirteenth chapter.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On Cauterization for Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are ancient and due to the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous and flux-like, then cauterize it with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the veins, and also with a cautery in the middle location of the head and two cauteries in the vertebrae below two temples, and two cauteries in the vertebrae below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need additional addition, then cauterize it in the entire length of the coccyx of the spine on the extremity of the forehead with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	The fourteenth chapter.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On Cauterization for Stench of the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat him with water as we have said in the division and your treatment does not take effect, then prepare yourself and give to drink to the patient cochial root for three nights; and then remove the head of him, and cauterize it with a middle-shaped cautery and an olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize it with a holly-shaped cautery, and two cauteries on both foreheads below the hair, a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to cut into that artery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the holly-shaped cautery, this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	The fifteenth chapter.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauterization for Softening of Eyelids of the Eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery in the shape of a crescent moon; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize that on both foreheads a little with two cauteries in all parts, and be extended from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the forehead.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand and the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is hardened.
Capitol .xvi.	The sixteenth chapter.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Eye when the hairs are converted to the inner parts and push the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye are converted to the inner parts in such a way that they push into the eye, cauterize them by two methods: one method is with fire or another method is with medicine which burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If with a cautery of fire, command the patient to look before him at those hairs as if they were being cleaned, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if pushing that hurts him, then you should strengthen the eyes of him with a bandage so that it is not troubled until the hairs are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, pause the head of the patient in your sight, and then sign above the eyelid of the eyes of him with a tenta, with a signal which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the signal near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then pause with a cloth wrapped in albumen of egg white or in a poultice of pellitory on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery which this is the form of it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the figure which you have signaled, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the code is burned away like a leaf of myrtle, all appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health for this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of him being lifted above the point of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift up your hand and leave it for three days, and then pause with a cloth wrapped in linen until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if some cause returns to the hairs and the eyelid is softened again, then do it again just as you did the first time.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is lifted to its natural place and equalized, so that the hairs do not push into the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is what you command the patient to look at the hairs until they are prolonged and equalized, and then make a shape of a leaf of myrtle on cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take one ounce of known saffron and fresh cause. The end! And so, and then mix those causes well, and make this with a feast to prevent it from being cooled; and then spread the water on the paper which is made in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and pause that over one eye or both eyes; and pause below the eye cloth wrapped in albumen of egg white, and the head of the patient be in your sight.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then pause the said thing on the medicine and press that a little bit and not trouble it until the patient feels the pungency of the medicine, for pungency is in him like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then, as he perceives that the medicine has a pungent effect, pause the medicine and trouble it with your said thing; therefore, when the pungency ceases, then removethe medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if the eyelid is already lifted as if it were washed away by fire or incision, for now all is well; and if not, return to that spot where you did not apply the medicine and do not despise until your operation is equalized and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause with a cloth wrapped in linen until the scar of adjustment is eradicated, and then cure that with ointment or another substance until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to keep a diligent vigilance that the medicine does not fall into the eye, and if the eyelid is softened after some days and some cause of the hairs pushes into the eye, then repeat your medicine on that spot where the eyelid is softened, and do it exactly as you did at the beginning, and then send the patient away until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of a leaf of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to their magnitude and smallness, and therefore, according to this, is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And may not be hidden the way of rectitude to him who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	The seventeenth chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On Cauterization of a Fistula that is in the Lachrymal Duct of the Eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with the water we have said in the divisions of diseases and it does not correspond to your treatment, then cause yourself to cauterize that according to this method: command the patient to pause his head in your sight, and hold the head of him by some minister between your knees in such a way that it is not troubled or agitated with his own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then pause with a cloth wrapped in albumen of egg white or in a poultice of pellitory on the eye of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is curved, like a form of cane or a pen nib of vulture, from one extremity to the other, with which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, be penetrating into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, be out like a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But meanwhile that which is curved is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out from it pus and dry up that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then pause with the cautery which is well ignited, and take that in your hand a little bit of the cautery from the eye to the nostril, so that you do not err or the patient be troubled, and then pause the cautery on the gray of the eye and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus if at the beginning of your cautery you pierce into the bone, it is good; and otherwise, then repeat the cautery one or two times as needed; and leave that so for three days, and then pause with a cloth wrapped in linen and surround it with an ointment to dry until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it has been passed eleven days and it is not healed, then pause with the medicine acute corrosive until the bone is uncovered and scraped according to what is written in your own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some first doctors also described: enter the location of the fistula and fill it with that; and then pause in that fissure, as subtle as the form of it: And pour into that the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and take your hand with a camomile with good retention, and do not trouble the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the eye of him; and cause that you pause on the eye of the patient cloth wrapped in albumen of egg white or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with the water we have said about the cautery and healing, it is good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to administer a cut of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its own proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	The eighteenth chapter.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On Cauterization of the Fissure of the Lips.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times it happens that fissures occur on the lips, and most especially on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, as you cure those fissures with the water we have said in the divisions and it does not improve your treatment, then ignite the cautery small knife according to this form that is seen:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And be the curvature of it according to the subtlety of a scalpel.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And then pause with that instrument gently in those fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	The nineteenth chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth an apostema forms and then breaks out, and then becomes old, and a fistula is formed, and you cure that but it does not improve with your treatment, then cause yourself to ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, and place that ignited cauteri into the opening of the fistula, and take your hand so that the hot iron reaches the depth of it, and at the end make it so once or twice; and then cure that with the water we have said about healing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus if the pus is discharged and healed, it is good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to discover the location and expose the corrupted bone according to what will come in its own chapter.
Capitol .xx.	The twentieth chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On Cauterization of the Teeth and Softening of the Gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are troubled, and you cure those with medicines but they do not correspond, then pause the head of the patient in your sight, and then ignite the cautery in the form which will come thus, namely that you pause the caustic on the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery hastily, and take your hand a little bit until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift up your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should fill his mouth with saltwater and keep it for an hour, and afterwards stop, because the troubled tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	The twenty-first chapter.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On Cauterization of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness, or in it is cold or warm, or does not correspond with the cure with medicine, then cauterize that according to two methods: either cauterization with the edge of cows, or cauterization with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with the edge is that you take the edge of cows and boil it in a cauldron of iron, and then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the tent, and then immerse that with boiled edge, and pause that over the painful tooth hastily until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the edge mentioned above, and pause that over the painful tooth, and pause on top of that hot iron until the iron reaches the depth of the curvature of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But meanwhile the cauterization by fire is that you attend to the heat of iron or copper, and be in its core some roughness and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form which will come, and pause that over the tooth and take your hand until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times because the pain is relieved or on that day or on the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cause that by the impression of that cautery, the patient should fill his mouth with good bread and keep it for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you wish at the extreme end according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the caustic:
Capitol .xxii.	The twenty-second chapter.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterization of Hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are caused by fat and cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to induce digestion of those slightly, then ignite the cautery curved in the form which is this following, having two extremities broad for the smoke of the cautery to escape through one extremity, and pause that ignited over that apostema once, or another time if needed, until it reaches the depth of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and let it be for three days and pause on top of that cloth wrapped in linen until what the fire has burned is relieved.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment and tents and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the caustic or of the cautery to this end is to convey.
Capitol .xxiii.	The twenty-third chapter.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Cauterization of Hoarseness of Voice and Constriction of Ale.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors come out of the throat and most especially when that is caused by coldness of congestion, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that in the root of the gullet in the location affected.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not burn too deeply with the cautery nor consume the cord of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And then cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it shall be like a claw, following the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with water that is preceded by it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	The twenty-fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Cauterization of Pulmonary Disease and Cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and pulmonary disease are caused by cold humors and the patient does not have fever or sweating, but is an old illness, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected locations, and with another cautery in the middle of the breast between two nipples; and let the cautery be like a claw according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, then make your cautery punctate with the points that are called puncture, in the form which precedes in the puncturing of earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points until they reach those places; and then cure that with water that is preceded by it, until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauteries have three bends where cauterization is done in that way: you can do three cauteries according to this form once.
Capitol .xxv.	The twenty-fifth chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On Cauterization of Titillation which is the Head of Assistance.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of assistance is displaced due to cause of lubricous humors and does not return to its usual place, and for a little movement it becomes displaced again as we have testified, then it is necessary to first reduce the displacement, and then let the patient be reversed onto his back or side; and then elevate the cord which is in the parting line above the citillic at the said parts with your left hand, if the juncture is dislocated above.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cord so that it enters one side and penetrates into the other; and the figure of cauterization will be like this, with four heads of cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and thus those subtleties according to the quantity of cloth; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cautery with porous cloth soaked in salt, and then cause the patient to adhere to quietness, and let the member not be troubled for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is above and it becomes confirmed, then cauterize on the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or with punctate cauteries, because the juncture is confirmed, and the humidity is removed, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	The twenty-sixth chapter.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold humors and many fluids come out of the stomach and are expelled from its natural disposition and multiply in it, and if you continue with the methods of cure and do not conform, then it is necessary to let the patient lie on his back, and stretch out his arms and legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one at the breast for the quantity of a finger with a claw-shaped cautery, and two at the sides of the cautery, so that the figure of triangular cautery appears; and elongate between them so that they are not adjusted to cause pressure.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And be the figure of the cautery according to this form without addition, And if you wish, then cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And be the stomach punctured by that which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish with cloth, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then cure that with the cure that precedes it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	The twenty-seventh chapter.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On Cauterization of Fretful Fetter.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When distress arises in the fetlock due to coldness or humidity or excessive evaporation, and it is expelled from its natural disposition by superfluous egress, and the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not correspond, then it is necessary that the patient lie on his back with his head bent, and sense with cloth three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the fetlock left of the hip bones, where the seat of man is.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And be the space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cauteries according to the length of a straight cord.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress your hand with the cautery motion.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the maturation of the cord's substance, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he is not standing, then let him be lying down, which has already stretched out its legs, and elevated its arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And if it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the substance of all the cord be absorbed so that it is absorbed throughout the body and reaches into the vessels, for the cord here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	The twenty-eighth chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On Perforation of Apostema of the Fetlock with a Cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When a swelling or apostema arises in the fetlock and you wish to know if that apostema is in the flesh of the fetlock or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the fetlock, the patient's gravity and pain become more acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tendon of the fetlock, with great pain and many times that already fatigues the doctors to cure it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto his back; and then sense the location of the apostema with cloth; and then ignite the cautery which is similar to rag, the form of which has preceded on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize with that and the cautery until all the cord is consumed, until it reaches the ciphac, until in which you escape with health.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with the cure of other apostemas until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this form of cauterization except by that doctor who has prolonged his study in the art of medicine and has known many diseases; but this one with experience has sometimes been bold in this operation, yet nonetheless you should follow my counsel, and it will be better.
Capitol .xxix.	The twenty-ninth chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cauterization of Pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They say the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology are to be used for pleurisy in a cold manner according to this way of making, and it is that which you take from the roots of aristology long dry one root point long which is found, and it is of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and ignite that at the fire, and then cauterize with one cautery at the location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries on the sides, one slightly declining towards the party that is below the beard, and with two others in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the navel, declining a little behind; and with another one in the middle location of the thigh; and with another one above the stomach, and with three others on the back; and with one cautery at the location which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two others from both sides of the thigh, leaving out the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifestation of the cord's work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already some ancient ones have said that there are some men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite it, and put it in the location which is between the ribs, so that it reaches to that apostema and expels bad blood, just as we have said in the apostema of the fetlock.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for too much happens soon enough in the location of the fistula to which there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	The thirtieth chapter.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On Cauterization of the Mole.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the disease of the mole with water as we have said in the division and do not conform your cure, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are right, of which one is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the mole according to the figure of the cauteries of the fetlock, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And be the thickness between each cautery that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the fetlock, equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand with the cautery; and let the patient lie on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And it is another manner of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery having two handles, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the cord which is at the end of the mole, where the left side of the patient's body will be.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be with which you elevate the cord according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries may be made according to the latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then enter the two handles, ignite it, into that which with those you will penetrate the cord of the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three handles.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then cure the cautery more than it has already laid down to get rid of the excess for too many days, because it is more certain that the other causes previously mentioned in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	The thirty-first chapter.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Cauterization of Hydrocephalus.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not used in hydrocephalus, but only in acute cases properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydrocephalus with the methods of cure which we have said in the division and do not conform your cure, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the waistline and one on the stomach, and another on the thigh, and another on the mole, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right side of the leg, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportioned to the thickness of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the cautery remain open for that reason so that it may get rid of excess for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from cure near the cautery with water as is necessary for two purposes, and let it be hastened to him with the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized is claw-shaped according to its previous form, and that with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	The thirty-second chapter.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Cauterization of Feet and Legs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with serous water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet above the ankle in non-irrigated water that is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it completely, because the serous water resists.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the cautery according to this form: And then make two cauteries on each leg, and in each leg be made a cautery at the extremity of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cauteries be according to the length of the leg: one at the top and the other at the middle location of the leg; and on each leg two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the wound remain open without cure for a long time because some water may flow from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The thirty-third chapter.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Cauterization of the Abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is cold and humid, causing the digestive and retentive virtues to be debilitated in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with the methods of cure and does not conform, and sometimes the patient requires a cautery of virtue to exhibit, then cauterize that with a large cautery on his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the ring-shaped cautery and four subtle cauteries around the waistline, with a claw-shaped subtle cautery; and with a cautery above the navel or two.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excess of humidity and the patient's tolerance are abundant, then cauterize that on the navel and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries above the stomach and near the inguinal region, because it is a perfect cure for the juice of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The thirty-fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When old hemorrhoids or one of the thick humors is in a state of congestion or corruption, and they are cured with water as we have said in the division and do not conform to the natural cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the small triangular spine and the small triangle-shaped bone, and another above the navel going down by two digits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that his stomach is inflamed and his food is not digested, and his face is often swollen, then cauterize that on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and one cautery on the thigh, and another on the mole of him with a claw-shaped cautery, and let the cautery remain open for some time, and then cure him until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	The thirty-fifth chapter.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On Cauterization of Athletes' Wounds near the Abscesses of Them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut away the athletes' wounds, then you ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And then put that ignited cautery into the athlete's wound cut away, and finally bring your hand to where the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make it once or twice, because if the wounds are many, then you cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with water that conforms to their wounds until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, it is more likely to be effective.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The thirty-sixth chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On Cauterization of Fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then cure him with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when you find some fistula in the natural opening of the body that is old and corroded, filled with pus and corrupted humidity, and thus what is most worthy to do is to make an attempt on it with a subtle probe, and then know the quantity of its depth according to the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then put that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the probe enters.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat that process with the cautery until those corrupted bodies are burned away at once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or to the intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a place where it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and the matters are cut away from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting, or falling victim to those causes of which a memory will be recalled in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The thirty-seventh chapter.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On Cauterization of the Tonsils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the tonsils there is pain due to congestion or great ventilation, and because of this the patient's throat is inflamed, then it is necessary that you cauterize that on each tonsil with a claw-shaped cautery, whose memory precedes.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And firmly cauterize with the second one a little bit away, so that three lined cauteries will be, and thus they will be more effective.
Capitol .xxxviii.	The thirty-eighth chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debilitation and mollification occur in the bladder due to congestion and corrupted humidity, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that on the part farthest from the navel, where the hairs of the navel begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the nodules on the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a claw-shaped cautery according to what has been processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	The thirty-ninth chapter.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Cauterization of the Mare.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When congestion and humidity occur in the mare, and because of this conception is prohibited, and the menstrual flows are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and there occurs pain due to the hinderance of their passage, then it is necessary that the location be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be claw-shaped.
Capitol .xl.	The fortieth chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Hip.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When corrupted humidity has flowed into the part of the hip, and causes have been formed that hinder the proper location of the joint, and the sign is that the leg is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found in the part where the buttock is.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a circle-shaped cautery, as you have signaled with a probe in the circuit of that part, and because the part falls into the middle location of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be of the same form as that which preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries and one large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire cord; and then cure that place until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	The forty-first chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the part of the hip, and its cause is congestion and humidity, the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not conform, and it is old, then it is necessary to apply the patient with thick humors using fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery in that is according to two methods: either a cautery with concombustive medicines, or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Then according to two scientific methods, one of which is that you cauterize that on the part of the hip with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of the said digit, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes there may be a cautery on the middle location on top of the hip bone, so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the hip dislocation, so that it be a continuous and burning circle that consumes the thickness of the entire cord.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and does not spread into the joint.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it spreads into the joint, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the joint over the location where the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery on the hollow for four digits a little above the hairy part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cut-like, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient says that the pain is spreading into the location near the bones of the feet, then cauterize that where it says with a cautery for three or four or more points if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient says that pain is below the kneecap near the joint, then cauterize that with a cut-like cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization that you do not stop the cautery until it has burned nerves or large arteries, and because of this it is bad for your patient to have bad necrosis or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one and another of those which I will cauterize on the hollow and finally in the cauterization, and the inflamed fire burns into the toe until the tumor reaches the end, and the fire perforates and corrupts all the toe.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then comes a strong solution of belly, and with this comes death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And they say that the wise men have said in the cauterization of the hip: make it similar to a circle of iron, the circumference of which is half a palm; and let its orifice be according to the thickness of a date pit or somewhat less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle be another fourth part; and let the space between them be equal to the thickness of the nodules on the foot; and let those circles be one above the other, and let their length be one nodule or two nodules, and make in those margins a ferruginous decently apparelled in the circles; and this is its form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And then be ignited in the fire until it blazes up and sends sparks, and then be placed on the part of the hip, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that with three cauteries rounded in one stroke.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that alone for three days; apply a poultice to it with a border and leave the wound open for many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Thus says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this type of cautery we have used little, due to the fear of looking at it, and therefore few have found those who look upon it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But from the good cauteries that suffered him, and found the place of him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But a cautery with concombustive medicines is one that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which the guaffo of the iron door should be placed; let the length of the walls be in the height of theirs, namely two nodules or as many as those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each one is equal to the thickness of the said digit; and let them be above and below, and let them contain themselves within each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place it on the part of the hip, with the patient lying on their side, and grasp your hand over the part of the hip; and then take cold water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be in the small fire, little by little, and keep it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to endure the mordication and the adjustment of it -- until that mordication ceases as if from fire.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the cold water from all the hip with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave that alone for three days and place over it a border until the blackness of the adjustment is restored, and leave it so for some days, and let it be filled with blood; this is the end in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is spread into the joint or thigh, make it like a statue in the water, according to what is done in the hip similarly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of cold water, and you have already written that in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and non-extinguished cause of both ana parts one, and crush them and place them in a new wave of which the left part is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it ray.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of one wave into another wave inverted, and pour on top of that alkali and living cause with warm water which covers them by one digit, and then you compress them with your own hand for good compression, and leave it so that the hole will descend from the sharp water in the left part to the inverted wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and other alkali renewed, because that which is already strong acuity will be administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, for this operation is fiery.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines are mixed with those which are cauterized wide, such as mezize, malanacrate, and causes with salt, so that they are blended.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounted the operation and cure of a man from ancient times who was cured of hip and sciatic vein pain with this method, and magnificently declared it to be very effective, saying that no other cure was needed, and thus he is healed in one stroke just like I recommended, for indeed that one entered into bath and exercise already knowing about this.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is said that a certain quantity of greenery should be used, and if not found, a fresh fig should be taken; and it should be crushed with a little gray powder and placed on the hip where there is pain, or in the joint or thigh, and bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for as long as the patient considers that the adjustment is giving way.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put it in bath, and when the body of him is heated, immerse it in the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that you should not use cautery with these medicines except in proper evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But already Escorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it will be of great benefit to him; and let the cautery be made according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dried goat's horn and fill it with fire until it is made into charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it in until it is spread out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not cease doing so until the sensation of the burning reaches into the hip and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the "cauterization of oxen".
Capitol .xlii.	Capítulo 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Chapter 42: On the Cauterization of Two-Pain Dolor.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is in both sides due to multiple causes, such as bruising or percussion or excessive evacuation, and similar causes by the infusion of moist and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery should not be done except in this one species, which is made by effusion of moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then it is good to do evacuation of the patient with fitting pills and similar ones that are made on the two sides where there is pain, three lines according to the latitude of him, plus or minus ten in each line, as much as one can tolerate and as far as his virtue allows.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And then do a cautery with a point cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four point-like cauteries in the middle of the medial line according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Chapter 43: On Cauterization at the Beginning of Gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease attacks small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs suddenly on their joints, causing swelling and elevation.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And this can be seen in the last cervical vertebra of the spine and the nodules of the joints, which already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that with a circle-shaped cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery on all parts of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the spine with a point-like cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be proper between each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the place until it is healed with this method which we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cautery should not be administered in gout that is caused by nervous spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Chapter 44: On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains are caused by humid humors that are accumulated in each member of the body, it is common for doctors to call this condition "podagra" properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when podagra caused by humid humors is cured by the method of cure and the pains do not relapse, then reapply the cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And so you cauterize that with evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot, using many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, whose form is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if necessary, make points on the fascia of the foot, and do so with a point-like cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise to the joints or other joints, and this many times occurs, then cauterize that on each joint with three or four cauteries of all parts with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed to make these cauteries necessary, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery before, only so much as to surround the thickness of the cord.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the elbow and thigh, then administer the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the most part and is called "suagra", then prick in the circle of the tendons as they revolve, pricking those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the said parts, then prick in the circle of the tendons on each joint and on the crease of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise quickly in some days to the joints or muscles, then cauterize all of them on every part of the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient with good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is done and phlegm is evacuated by this cautery, it will be healed, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Chapter 45: On Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a wound occurs in the groin and says that the abscesses are bursting before the saddle at the genitals, and this is beginning to happen, then it is good for you to tell the patient to stop their diet for the day and to use gentle remedies so that the wound may close up from its own vent.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient with your hands on their back above their knees, and command him to keep his leg straight until the wound is completely healed or the abscess appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return to that place with your fingers and signal by touch the rupture over the bone of the pubic bone, signaling the extremity of which is similar to half a circle at the divided parts of the chest.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery whose form is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is hot and sparks fly.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the abscess or abscess to its natural conformation, and then place your hand on the location to prevent the abscess from bursting.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already located between the joints of the patient and left one joint, and another serves on his thighs, and another on his feet, which has its own masses.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that spot indicated by your hand with the cautery standing upright, and apply it to that area until you reach the bone of the pubic bone in the middle of the duodenum; and repeat on another occasion if you do not achieve success on the first attempt, until you reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the signs of the abscess at the time of your cautery, lest you burst that abscess and cause harm to the patient, leading to death or great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you apply the cautery, do not touch the bone, nor compromise your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is good that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then cure the location of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar of the fire is restored.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with other remedies until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for 40 days until the location and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is good that you pause the patient's nutrition according to the length of time of their cure, and that the abscess does not burst forth from the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then, when it is almost 40 days, apply gentle remedies and keep that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let it be diminished in work and repletion of food and drink, and in violent voices, for when one uses this regimen of entire healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you will say the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want them not to stop, then cauterize the rupture with that red-hot cautery according to the quantity of it, and let it be as if it were taken out of the cord just like the third part of it; and then cure that with what we have said, and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already some first ones have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is signaled by touch:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is a paused line that goes through the latitude in the lat and above the rupture, and another line above it; and then place your hand on one cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Chapter 46: On Cauterization of Twist.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When a pain occurs in some members due to bruising or percussion and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to cure with medicines, then it is good to cauterize with a point-like cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be on every member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and defect, location of twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then reapply the cautery to him; for it is a custom of those pains that they are punctured in one member to another which approaches them, so that you must achieve those with cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Chapter 47: On Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers have been cured with cautery for great benefit, and more so if the species of leprosy is caused by the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and do not despair, nor remain, and fear for the patient that the corruption will comprehend all the body of him and all the composition of him, then cauterize that on the head with v cauteries: one in the middle location of the head, and the second a little below it, and on the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or services.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand with the cautery is applied a little to imprint on the bone a small impression, and from there the scales are dislocated, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated for him; and cauterize on the malleus according to what was previously said.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already spread out on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is good for you to cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with one cautery on the tip of the nose, and two on both kneecaps, and two on both vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one great one on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on each coccyx, and two on both ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on both elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on both hips, and one on each hip, and two on both shoulders, and one on each shoulder, and two on both hands, and one on each hand; and cauterize that person on all the joints of the said members and feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the tendons of his legs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves which are over the tendon that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some times it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the pubic bone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and congruent it is; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just like they do in their skin, because of which the body of him has already been stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is good that the cauteries be great or small according to the members and joints, as preceded by the species of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with flour from errors cooked with honey and with another remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Chapter 48: On Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some member is numb or falls asleep and is cured with medicines, oils, and emplasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to its magnitude or smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery go into the thickness of the cord a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with another remedy until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some times it is cauterized with some stupor which occurs in the legs and feet, and in the vertebrae of the back, and one sees the inflammation of the nerves that move that member, and the stupor is restored.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this except for him who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Chapter 49: On Cauterization of Moles that are Morpheal.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When moles are old and do not respond to any of the remedies of medicine, then you should cauterize over them with a pre-cooked cautery for a little while according to the quantity of the specific kind of cord until the whiteness and color of it is restored, and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with flour of errors and lentils mixed with roasted oil and with leaves of arnoglossa, and with blood of dove or with blood of hernia, each portion being one part and all being mixed together; and then apply a cloth to the location and have it remain until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Chapter 50: On Cauterization of Gout.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When gout is beginning and you want to stop it, then cauterize that with a circular cautery in the circuit of it as it revolves.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me it is not seen this way, for I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterize in the circuit of it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Chapter 51: On Cauterization of Swelling.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some swelling is delayed in maturity, and thus it is due to excessive fluid or the condition of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of swelling; then cauterize in the circuit of it with many small point-like cauteries; and then loosen that which would have fastened in maturity.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery whose form is this: and place that in the middle location of the swelling so that it penetrates to the cord.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that location is more behind, so that the body of the arm is alleviated; and then cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Chapter 52: On Cauterization of Consumption.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Consumption is a corrupting wandering in the member, which corrupts it like fire consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that consumption in a location which suffers from cautery with fire, then ignite many small point-like cauteries and great ones according to what is suitable in that location where the consumption is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that from all sides until you eradicate all corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then loosen that for three days, and apply oil mixed with turpentine to the locations that were cauterized, so that all scars are eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then cure that with meat-generating remedies.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy and there is no corruption in which case it is good; but if not, then reapply the cautery to what remains in the corrupted locations.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And consumption is medicated with acute medicine for some days, because that is a means to locate the cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But still, a cautery with fire is of greater benefit.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure for it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have need of it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Chapter 53: On Cauterization of Warts and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times it happens that there is a lingering part of the foot disease which is called a wart, and it is a big, festering cause that spoils the foot; and cauterization in those places is done in two ways, namely by fire cautery and water-boiling cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But fire cautery is when you ignite the concave cautery similar to a vulture's claw, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart on all sides, and has subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then pause that ignited cautery over the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And then loosen that for three days until it begins to fall off.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that with wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and loosen the plaster over it for one night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that location with meat-generating remedies until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and many times it happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the arms and legs, then you must administer cauterization with water, and it is that you take a quill or iron or vulture's claw, and place it over the wart; and then pour into the quill a small amount of boiling water, and hold your hand, and you revolve it with compression from all sides, and press the edge of the quill into the root of the wart, and let the hot water flow slowly to the depth of the cavity; and wait for the patient a little while after the injection of the hot water for one hour, and then remove that, so that the wart with its roots is eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do it to those, and then apply the other remedy until you reach all of them that are in their place on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those with pus, which is eradicated from the roots of the warts, with remedies that promote flesh growth.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Chapter 54: On Cauterization of Trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When it happens that someone has a trembling due to fracture of the nerves or due to fever caused by fright, or for another similar reason, then you should cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and also on the legs of him, and on his stomach, with an olive-like cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of him subsides and hastens the recovery from the frightful disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Chapter 55: On Cauterization of Accidental Blow to the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body are accidentally struck blows, and pustules are formed which are made of gross corrupted matter; then it is necessary at first to appear as if prepared, that a subtle cautery be applied over the entire head of the fistula with a myrtle stick whose extremity has been extended with fire; or with roots of long-estiolated herbs; or with a lentecular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and do not believe, and the excess causing those is broken up, and they are cured from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But it is necessary that this be done properly with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Chapter 56: On Cauterization of Blood Flowing from an Accidental Cut by a Sword.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times it happens that blood flows from a wound caused by an accidental cut by a sword, or from the incision of apostemes or cauteries on a member, and then similar things happen, and it is difficult to stop that bleeding.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when it happens that blood flows excessively, then you must quickly apply your hand to the wound of the sword, and place on top of it what I have said earlier, and strengthen that many times until the bleeding is stopped, and there will be no further flow.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive-like cauteries in the fire, small and great, in many numbers, and blow on them until they are thoroughly ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those one small or large according to the location and wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein more quickly than you have removed what I have said earlier, and apply the cautery until it is completely absorbed and restrained that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove what I have said and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the ones that are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this repeatedly until the bleeding is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that you bring another misfortune upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrain the bleeding in those circumstances, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: or by the cautery as we have said earlier, or by extraction which is not extracted, because when it is extracted, the ends of it are burned and the bleeding is restrained, or that it be tied with a thread or with a ligament through strong constriction, or that medicines be applied to it, whose virtue is to restrain the bleeding; and they should be strengthened by a pillow or by a decent constraint.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But the one who administers a decent restraint on him with a ligament and strong constriction by drapes or through position of concurring causes and similar things does not respond quickly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if it happens to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine, then do the following: work slowly with the above-mentioned cautery on the orifice of that vein as we have said earlier; and understand that the great constriction of him is necessary until the bleeding is stopped from the superior part of the wound, and on the sword-cut it has not been removed; and above the sword-cut be sprinkled with boiling water of great coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and also consider in what kind of cauterization or medicine is needed.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Starts the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On Incision, Perforation, and Wounds, and their likenesses, including Phlebotomy and Wounds.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all diseases in which a cautery with fire is suitable and with medicine that concurs, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for those things, and we have arranged the chapters of this book from head to foot.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter by that method, so that what is sought after may be illuminated to him who asks about it, and thus over what has been asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter, it is about the terrors of which we spoke in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore it is necessary that there be great caution in him, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation occurs which is with blood and on which life depends; and so one must be cautious with the sprinkling of the vein or incision over the apostema or warning of exit or purgation of the wound or extraction of a sagitta or incision of a pyre, and their likenesses.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that on you should not fall this thing in which there is occasion, for sometimes the case demands of men many manners of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them some go away with their disease and it is soon for him to die, and so through the intensity of what he finds in his disease, and through the length of his disease, and in the disease there is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from those some receive from their son's heritage and gift, you waiting for him to be healed, and his disease is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not necessary that you consent to what comes to you from which this manner; and your caution should be greater than cove-ity and rapacity; and do not presume any cause over what comes to you, but rather aprop science certain which verifies what comes to you, and by which success succeeds.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your diseases prophesying and indicating to you that which is salvation converted, for in that is aid to you over the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires His understanding in you, and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter on cauteries, from head to foot, so that it may be illuminated to you what you ask about and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter 1.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the Cure of Water that is contained in the Head of Children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often occurs in children during childbirth and when the midwife tightens the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause which is unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have never seen this disease except in children; and to all those whom I have seen it has been accompanied by death, and so it is my work left undone in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water overflowed, and his head was always magnificently expanded so that it could not cease to pour forth, and more than the humidity was increased until a mortal fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the skull and bone, or accumulates beneath the bone on the cranium.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	So the operation in that case if the moisture is between the skull and bone and the apostema is small, then it is necessary to cut in the middle of the head with an incision in the latitude, and the length of the incision should be two nights so that the moisture flows out, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the moisture is more increased and the apostema is greater, then there are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, the sign of it is that you must cut the commissures of the head on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you compress that with your hand into the partitions inside and not to be hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary for you to cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And carefully extract all the moisture from the incision; and carefully strengthen the incisions with cloths and poultices; and carefully bandage it on the fifth day, and carefully remove the ligature and care for the wound with tents and poultices, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which considers how the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water appear, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or in the right, or in the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the accumulation of water, and do so as best you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and thus the blood flows and the patient dies from that flow of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the Incision of the Arteries which are near the Ears, called Hilasseyes.
Capitol segon.	Chapter 2nd.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When the case arises with some catarrh or rheums in the eyes or feet, and it is ancient, and does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the final cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore it is necessary when you wish to incise those which the patient's head becomes inflamed, and carefully palpate the location with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and carefully strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and carefully consider where the vein pulsates; and the places of each above the places which are near the ears depressed, and they will be hidden from almost no one.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And carefully cut on the artery with a tent, and carefully incise each one with a spatula from each side, sharp as if to penetrate into the bone, and so that it is in the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at the same spot where the incisions are made on the sides.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' breadth, because when any vein is cut it begins to bleed with a pulsating egression, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three fingers' breadth, and carefully insert with a tent, and cut into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And this amount of blood that is necessary to be taken is about one ounce of wine. and not too little or too much, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the disease and the accumulation of the artery in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And carefully consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the skull, then incise this so that no apostema appears.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And carefully strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and carefully cure that with compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the Extraction of the Arteries which are in the Temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old emigration or catarrh occurs in the temples, due to humidities and qualities of the lacertae, or an old violent and similar condition to those, and it is medicated by the methods of cure with medicine, but does not respond, then we have resolved on these diseases to extract the arteries in the temples, or cauterize them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient scratches the skin where they are in the temples; and understand that the artery appears in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulsation, and is hidden from almost no one except for a few individuals due to the intensity of the pulse.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and carefully palpate the location with a rough cloth or evaporate the location with warm water until the artery appears to you in its full manifestation.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the spatula of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then carefully score the skull with that spatula, making it easy for you to reach the artery; and carefully cut into it on one side and extract that from the upper parts until you extract that from the skull and discover those tunics which are below it, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is slender, then carefully envelop it with the extremity of the oncus, and cut into that one side according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and do not let there be a flow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And carefully evacuate about one ounce of blood. within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then carefully divide it into two parts with a double fold of caede or with strings to a length, and do not allow the putrefaction to occur before the consolidation of the wound and the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And carefully cut away the excess which is between two bandages; and do this at that hour or approximately another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cauterizer into the bone with a cutlery-like cauterizer until the extremities of it are incised and remain in the location of that middle work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of scorched complexion; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to dry up the humidity, and therefore it is better in this case.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to carefully extract the arteries that fill the old wound, and be paused over the powder decently made, and be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and with some other remedies until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working on another occasion the blood flow from the artery occurs again, then you should stop that blood flow, or with a cauterizer, or by filling the old wound, and strengthen your hand until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of these causes are not present to you, then pause your hand over the location until the blood is congealed, and envelop the location with warm water of vehement coldness until the sharpness subsides, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two coats, since you have marked the two locations with a tent, and deposit each one, hot and burning, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it may be lengthened, because they are not completely consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two coats is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But however if there is less sharpness than two coats are better, for if they are as sharp as two coats, near each other, and do not cut the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut off gradually.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space which is between two coats is the quantity of the thickness of the said.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the Cure of Eyes with Sharp and Acid Tears.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acid and it is the body of those veins which are above the forehead of the head, and do not respond to any cause of medicine, and the face of the patient becomes reddened and feels a wandering movement as if ants were marching, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, damp, and so dry that their eyelids are condensed, and the eyelids are scalded by the acidity of the tears, the old mixture of herbs in the cure of those from this operation, and name that cure with a spatula.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to scratch the skin which is on his forehead, and carefully incise in the forehead three cuts equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the cut is two fingers' breadth: one cut should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the lacertae which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in both sides, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers' breadth.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or cloths which are dry and rough, with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And carefully insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, the form of which is the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the flesh which is between two incisions on the skull which is above the bone, and carefully do this from the first incision to the second.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And carefully place this spatula and enter into the first incision once again with another instrument which is called a cutlary, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the lateral part of that sharp instrument on the flesh attached to the bone, and the lateral part of it will enter into the bone, and bring that forward until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But it is necessary to continue the incision up to that point of the bone, and carefully do this in the middle fissure until the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when there is a quantity of blood equal to that, express the places of the cloths which have been saturated with congealed blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And carefully pause in each fissure the old wound, and pause over those powder-like substances soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar, so that there will be no putrid apostema.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer great abundance of warm water or tea, and carefully cure with compresses made from basil, rose oil, and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the Cure of Tears by Cataracts and those that descend from the parts behind the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When some sharp and continued cataracts occur, and the patient's eyes are exhausted, small, and their regard is weakened, and the palpebral conjunctivae are ulcerated and the eyelids are dry, and in the forehead of the head there is a sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know by these accidents that the matters and cataracts come from many veins of the parts behind proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in these cases is this: you command the patient to scratch his forehead, and carefully incise a cut at the middle of the forehead, a little distance from the lateral (beginning with the left temple and going to the right temple; and the incision goes into the bone; and stretch your hand over the lacertae of the temples which are above the mastigatio), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Excise all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and carefully fill between the two lips of the wound with old wound dressings or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And carefully place above on those powder-like substances soaked in wine and oil, so that there will be no putrid apostema.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have removed that and see that the apostema is already diminished, then carefully make the bone warm by applying heat to it until the flesh begins to appear, and carefully cure with an emplasting regiment which will make the flesh appear, just as if you were to take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from that make a poultice and administer it to these wounds at the natural birthplace of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the Cure of what occurs in the Ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the causes that occur in the ears are of four species, for one is mineral or similar to mineral, such as iron and vermilion, or it is of plant origin, such as cypress or fava, or it is fluxible cause, such as water and vinegar, or its likeness, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore, when mineral or similar cause occurs in the ear, or another cause that does not adjust or believe in the ear, and pause the ear at the sun, and if the mineral is sometimes present, then you should distill into it some cause of violet oil or sambucus, and carefully administer the extraction of it, and make the stornutation occur with conditions, and oppose the nose to the event of stornutation.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And carefully place some cloths or woolen strips around the ear canal, and stretch the ear upwards to the upper parts, because many times it is forgotten about these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gotten, then you should administer the extraction of it with the instrument called "epicicario" which is subtle and has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten about the instrument, then it is good; and otherwise, you should administer the extraction of it with a subtle oncus of gentle doubling.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten about this, then you should make a tube of iron and insert the tip of the tube into the ear canal and close around the tube with wax and softened oil, so that only the tube remains.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And carefully extract the air from the tube with strong attraction, because many times, as we have recounted, such cases occur.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then you should take of hawthorn illuminated or of vine with its leaves which have been prepared so that birds eat a small quantity, and place that on the tip of the ray, and carefully envelop around that wound decently placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And carefully insert that into the ear canal with ease, and carefully dry out the ear from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten about all the causes which we have recounted, then you should carefully cut away that before it becomes a putrid apostema or convulsion.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting away that is to first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of it, and carefully make that cease between your hands and convert the ear to the upper parts, and then make a small incision in the root of the ear above the grey hair.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the incision should be of a lunar shape until it reaches the bone, and when the bone is blackened, you can stop that if possible with suitable instruments; and carefully close the incision at that hour with speed, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause occurs in the ear is one of the fat things that are swollen and inflamed, then you should administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your instructions, then you should take a spatula made of tin or silver, shaped like this:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the excision of that fat thing which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not make that incision when you think that the fat thing has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause that in many pieces, and carefully extract from those with onces or with subtle gestures, or with incisions as we have said, because it is alleviated the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use stornutation with conditions at the beginning, and fill his own ear with a little old wax, and place a small amount of that on top of the ear where the water is, and if it is forgotten, good; otherwise, you should take many iron pyrites and lemons according to the length of the finger, and heat those in the fire for a while, and the patient should insert one of those into the canal of his own ear and strike upon one piece of that part and pound with another pyrite on the pyrite which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not cease this treatment with iron until all the water is forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take a piece of paper or of cloth, I, I, I. and place one end of it into the ear and extend the other end in the fire until the wick of it is consumed.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	and carefully place another cloth and make this many times until all the water is forgotten, and insert that with a tube as we have said before regarding the extracting iron.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of the beast that enters into that ear, if it is small and similar to a worm, then cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size, which causes appear to the sense of feeling, then you should administer the extraction of it with gestures and onces, and the cause of it is more easily removed than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of the worm generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and your cure does not take effect, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any cause of worms appears here, then you should extract it with gestures or subtle onces; but if no cause appears, then you should take a tube made of reed and above amplified, which has this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle end into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can tolerate; and carefully suck out with it a strong suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your instructions, then you should apply and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; and administer distillations which the ancients have already proven in the cure of worms, and find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, which has this form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or of lead, reed-like, with a small channel and a plate on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore, as you enter what is in the conquest of the tube, here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the thread and wrap it around the end of it decently, and carefully pour oil into the concavity of the ascending part, or juice from some herb, or whatever you like of these medicines in the tube - and that is in the ear -, and carefully insert the thread with a cut above and express with your hand that on compressing temperately until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ascending part and the patient feels the oil going out.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what has been inserted into the ear is already burned with a small fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too strong, for the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure of Ear Blockage.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children are born with unperforated ear vents from their mothers' wombs, and this already happens to some men, blockage in the meat of the ear due to wound or flesh not being there; and sometimes this blockage occurs in the front of the ear canal which does not allow for feeling, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the front of it, which does not comprehend the feeling, is in the greatest difficulties for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which comprehends the feeling, it is necessary that you expose the patient's ear to the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if there is apparent swelling, open that with a subtle spatula which has this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it has a small width, in which one part is acute and the other is not; and the spatula is two fingers wide to avoid causing injury to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the blockage is due to flesh born in the ear or in the canal of it, then you should cut away that with subtle onces and incise it with a violent facility until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the blockage is in the front of the ear, then you should take a subtle thread made of lemon and heat it with fire for a while, and carefully insert that into the canal of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you have sensed swelling with the patient's discomfort and ease, due to gravity of sound, force the oppression of it with ease; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And carefully place in the ear a cloth soaked with linen according to the quantity of the width of the canal which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take vinegar and dip that into water and powder it on top and use it; and if the ear has already become apostematous, then you should extract the vinegar and replace it with another vinegar which you have wrapped in cerote made with rose oil, until the apostema is cooled; and carefully cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then you should submerge a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it on the ear, and use another cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillations.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the Cure of Athazil, which infects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athazils which infect the eyelids of some people are sometimes humid, and at other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you take those with tendrils or onces, and cut them with an instrument of the same kind as their roots, and carefully place them on the spots as if pressed.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain with bleeding occurs, then you should cauterize those with a lunar cautery, subtle and precise.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to make incisions and multiple times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure of Grandessia which occurs in the eyelids of people.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it occurs in the eyelids of people some cause which is similar to Grandessia in its strength and hardness, and therefore Grandessia is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an aggregation of great moisture in the eyelid above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is that you should consider whether the Grandessia is coming from above in what appears to be from the eyelid and spreading to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision in that with a fissure by the width, and carefully cut away all parts with ease, and then suspend it with onces and dissect it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared with the incision of it, and only push to penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision little by little, then this will not help in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not suffer harm from it because the medicine of it restores that and makes it flesh.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the Grandessia is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid, then you should remove the surface outwardly, and carefully lift the eyelid and suspend the Grandessia with onces, unless you are forced to make an incision; and press that part thoroughly, and if the eyelid becomes elongated through incision, this will not help in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And carefully wash the eyes with salted water; and cure the spot with that which becomes flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the Cure of Axirnach in the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axirnach is a greyish substance which is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, and more often affects children, aggravates their eyes, and causes their pupils to become constricted; and they are unable to gaze at the brightness of the sun because tears are shed upon them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore you should wet their faces with tears all the time, and upon their faces they sleep; and so on the eyelids of theirs above, there are moistened cilia, which have already been covered by inflammation, and apparent danger is in the eye; and when you press the spot with those same drops, you will cause the swelling to go away.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some manner of operation is in that which the patient places his own head on a certain spot, and carefully places a cloth made from linen and water, and makes a circle according to the quantity which contains Axirnach from all parts; and carefully places that upon it and presses with the same drops throughout so that swelling occurs in the middle of the circle; and carefully ends in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incised by a fissure for width, and the fissure is not greater than the one made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the front it is necessary that you cut through the cord entirely until you reach Axirnach, because in the most difficult processes Axirnach proceeds by fissure according to the form of white gravel.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the same drops to the outer parts and turn it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure because with the spatula you will not reach the eye and you will cause it to be lost.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if there is no Axirnach at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a little with facility until Axirnach processes; and carefully extract that as we have said; and carefully submerge cloths made from linen in water and vinegar and place them on the spot and strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so, some that are salted place it in the concavity of the fissure because this which remains from that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And carefully cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an apostema occurs in the spot, then carefully cure that with compresses which cool down until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On Manner of Touching the Eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of people there are found by adjustment, the natural hairs and so become old, then those eyes are not suitable for the eye and cause a method of maladies such as continuous tears and softening of eyelids and skin, until that is the cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye, and cure it in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization; or it is made to touch by incision and suture; or by canals as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore it is necessary that you place the patient's head in the correct position; carefully convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, be careful; and if not, insert an awl into that which has a thread from the more distant part of the eyelid, and make the awl penetrate through the thread above, and so - next to the edge of the eyelid where there are hairs - next to the hairs, and pull the thread up to the parts above with the eyelid, and convert it with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And carefully end in the outer part of the eyelid behind the hairs with a spatula incised for the lacrimal major into the lacrimal gland; and carefully extract the thread and place it behind the eyelid with small powder or cloth, and carefully sew on the eyelid with a needle, and be like that as a figure of myrtle's leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because this already varies among men, because some of them require a great amount to be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And carefully end with the spatula on the two lines which you have sewn, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is next to the natural hairs like it is the greatest thickness of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And carefully place the onyx in one of the two angles of the cord, and carefully remove it all, and carefully adjust with the sutura the two lips with a subtle thread or wool, and wash away the blood, and make what is superfluous from the threads to stick to the eyelids with some causes that are visible, if you wish to do so, and if not, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And carefully loosen the sutura of the threads within three or four days, and carefully cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without suturing and cure it with what dries up and constrains, because the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the aggregation of pus; but suturing is better. And so thus say our ancient ones who practiced touching.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But meanwhile in him there was solicitude about the patient, and it was of good operation, and not in him fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manner of touching, and it is that you sew on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and carefully elevate the eyelid with three threads separated and gathered according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to take the threads, and this is not equated, then carefully take an awl with thread and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread next to the lacrimal major, and the second thread next to the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the same drops the threads with equality, and carefully elevate all the cord on which is sewn as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And carefully adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an apostema occurs due to your incision or your fissure, then carefully dress that apostema with cerote and lint, and cover it with powders.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes it happens that the eyelid is converted into its own hairs, then it is necessary to use on it what we have said about incision; but suture in each case is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Taxinating with canals is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is outside according to what I have recounted; and carefully, by art, make two canals or two subtle astels of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs is smaller than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each partition, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And carefully add each one with subtlety over what superfluously remains of the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the canals of each partition with a strong stricture, and leave it for some days, because the cord will die and become denuded and will settle in as it will naturally fall.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then carefully cut the thread with scissors, and carefully cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it has hardened, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the Elevation of Stinging Hairs in the Eye with an Awl when the Hair is Hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard, rough, and stinging the eyes, then the operation in that is that you take a subtle awl and place it in that subtle thread of cedarn or lemon, and carefully adjust the extremities of it and notice each one in a manner very subtle.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be of the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And carefully compose another subtle thread below it in brief, and bind the extremities of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And carefully place the patient's head in the correct position, and be next to the sun so that your work is declared, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And carefully insert the awl into the root of the adjusted hair which has required engineering, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract that above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And carefully pull out the hair above and insert it into the socket, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And carefully pull your hand with it until the hair is outside the socket in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is attracted to the socket and not pulled out the hair, you will pull the socket towards the parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until it becomes extracted from above the brow.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And leave it with the vision of the eye, because you will extract the socket and the thread, and each one will be closed and tightened the eye, and leave the closure for two or three days, until the hair sticks to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, then you will adjust a long hair from the natural hairs, and it will be elevated with that, or let it settle until it becomes stretched to some space, and then you will elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the Cure for the Condition which appears on the Eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it appears on the eye as ehacratir, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its own direction, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this ehacratir either is natural or accidental, and is caused by consolidation of wound or sections or cauterizations, or by resemblance to their maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation in that is that you cut open that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in what is between them a piece of linen cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary that you use a cure for that from the causes which dry out and constrict; because if you do so, it will return to ehacratir even worse than before there was no time at all.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that a remedy which softens, such as fenugreek, and soak it in the water in which are cooked high and full of seeds, or emblument oil, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your remedy is that you pierce all that which is not consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said, is nothing but some correction of ehacratir that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the Cure for Ehacratir which is made in the Eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ehacratir which is made in the Eyelid below, which is truly called vertadierament ehacratir; and it is of him some natural, other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is made by wound or section or cauterization or by other likenesses.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation in that is that you take an awl with a double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal gland on the left side to the lacrimal gland on the right side, until the thread reaches both extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And carefully extend the flesh to the upper parts with the awl and cut it with the awl, and incise with a spatula wide.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if the figure of the eyelid returns to its proper shape, it is good; and otherwise, take the thread and place it in the cleft figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the extremities of the two fissures are at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they converge, and it is to be done with their own natural angle, so that when they come together, a figure is formed from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And carefully cut off the flesh to the quantity that is the width of the lacrimal gland below, which marks the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And carefully adjust the separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool; and carefully cure those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if ehacratir occurs due to a fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary that you cut with a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid according to what has been previously mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And carefully separate with a poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the cure for ehacratir when it is above or below, that which occurs in that operation, according to what has been prepared in the form of ehacratir, and that is in the form of diverse varieties.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans prepare skillfully in every possible way that is possible to them, so that they may return the figure to its natural form, or almost to that, and that patient according to what is convenient for him, regarding the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or to the Cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men, it is solidified on top of the eyelid as if it were a film, and prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you intervene at the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and lift it up or extend it with an instrument.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And carefully incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp like the incisions, having obtuse edges a little bit so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula so as not to injure the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And be the incision which carefully separates that adhesion with facility, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And carefully put in the eye salted water with which you wash; or distill on it dissolved zinc in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And carefully separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of lint, and place it over the eye wool infused in the albumen of egg, and carefully use for three days causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the Incision of the Nail and Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimals.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two manners, for either it is nervous, and resembles a hard and subtle cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture, which when iron touches it, or takes hold of the onychium, is abscinded and the onychium is not fixed in place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the lacrimal major, and gradually become smaller as they cover the eye and prohibit light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the manner of working in this incision is that the patient places his head in the correct position, and carefully opens the eyes, elevates the eyelid with his hand, and carefully collects the nail with an onychium of slight duplication and extends it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And carefully take an awl and insert into it a horse, ox, or cow hair, or something similar, or a strong thread, and duplicate the extremity of the awl little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the awl, and tie with thread the nail; and extend it to the upper parts, and excise on one side of the nail what is seen as the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow that with the hair until the end of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And carefully incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and loosen the natural flesh of the lacrimal so that through the incision there is not a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And in some cases the nail with the sole onychium extended or with thread, just as we have said, and carefully excised with a lion's spatula of which this is its form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the spatula, lest you cause a rupture and perforate the pupil.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And carefully place the incision in the eye a little salt powder or made from sinew, and let it sit for another day; and carefully cure that with water as needed until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the awl, nor is it fixed in that place the onychium, then many times this species of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed just as I have said and recounted in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then you will work on the patient's eye and take a subtle spatula of lion's fur with keen edges according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if at times it is rarefied and is confused and enters into that root, then you will distill from your own eye with sinew or with rosy cheeks or with salt powder, and apply the eye to another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And carefully iterate over that the operation until all that is of it is removed, except for the opposite apostema which is in the eye, because then you will leave it and cure the apostema from the beginning until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And carefully iterate your operation over that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye with great harm, should be suspended with onychium; and incise that from one part, and do not finish the incision so as not to cause a flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And carefully distill into the lacrimal rose-colored and made from sinew, until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the Incision of Algae and Water that is born from flesh adjusted in the Eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some times in the eyes of some people is born red flesh, and it is superimposed to cover the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids at the outer parts and is assembled like a rose bush.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation in this case is that the patient places his head in the correct position; and carefully opens the eyes of that and collects all that flesh with onychium convenient for water, and takes water with a forceps or a basket; and carefully incises the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the instrument, and be careful not to injure the eye which might lead to your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be the incision with which you cut those or with the spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is gathered according to the form that will come forth at this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And so when your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salt powder, or distill into it red powder similar to those medicines corrosive, and place over the eye a cloth made from albumen of egg, until you are assured of apostema cautious.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains some cause of algae and is carefully removed cautious, and you fear apostema cautious, then leave the eye and cure that apostema with water which will cause that apostema to heal, and carefully iterate over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the eye of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But always keep in mind that you must alienate all cure of the eye from natural or accidental means, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is sufficient for that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the Collection of Scales in the Eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Scales which come red and are rough on the eye and prevent the veament from performing its operation, and unfold the eye along with days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which scales are present is strong and there is no other disease besides scales, then you will collect those scales.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place his head in the correct position, and carefully suspend those veins with one or two according to your prudence; and be that one thread of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two threads gradually in one case according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And carefully collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wipe away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye and turned back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not injure the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so as to cut only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then you will distill into the eye green or red liquid so that with its keenness it may dissolve the water that is removed from the scales.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this water is not possible for you to collect at that hour, then gather everything in that hour and carefully apply all the water that relieves the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is soothed and you are assured of cautious apostema.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And carefully iterate over it according to the same manner, until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the Reduction of Rhinorrhea to the Nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure a rhinorrhea with cauterization or acute medicine, and it is not healed as previously described, then do not intervene in it, but rather cut over the apostema of that maturity, and extract all the moisture which is in it and pour it into until the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackness appears in it, then you will scrape it with an instrument whose form is:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called "Aspercap", and is made of iron, and has a red head like an ash, which is pointed with a fine point by lime or alkali for a subtle point (like in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that on the corrupted spot of the bone, and carefully rotate it between the said digits, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and carefully restore the spot with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the spot is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the purulent abscess has been removed and remains for 40 days without being renewed or becoming apostematous, nor does any accident occur in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then do not intervene in it, but rather reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover from below with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you take a thread according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the handle of it first reduced to the extremity in that way as if times were thus.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And carefully place that over the bone, and it should be that prop of the lacrimal; and stretch your hand a little from the eye, and carefully turn your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient by finding air to come out so when you put your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore carefully restore the spot with drying and astringent medicines as if it were well taken care of.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and the spot are hardened, then the material which flows to the outer parts returns to the nose, therefore this is less troublesome for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes in its entirety and there is no accident or diminution in the veament, then you must loosen the patient, and carefully follow, and carefully pause for breathing exercises without scarification and sucking for good suction; and carefully place a poultice on the eye made of acacia and aloe and onions and sarcocolla, and carefully strengthen the emplaustre on the eye with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's mane many times, and each cloth be doubled into four folds; and make from those many.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And carefully place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And carefully strengthen on top of those with a strong cloth, and iterate the suction without scarification; and carefully stop the suction and leave the eye tightly wrapped day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the ligament is softened in the meantime, then you must make it very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And carefully stop the ligament tightly day and night just as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the eye is already reduced, good; and if not, then carefully repeat the poultice with the powders and stricture and suction until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uveal tunic, and it is elevated and proceeds forth from the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its form resembles that of a human being by this, and you want to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have recounted, which you will insert the awl into the root of the uvea at the lower part and leave the upper part above, and carefully place another awl in the double thread part from the lacrimal side, and make that penetrate and leave the first awl according to its disposition; and carefully incise the location of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea into the circuit of the awl, and strengthen that motion.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And carefully extract the awl and place it on the eye lanolin infused in egg white, and leave it until the thread falls onto the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And carefully cure the eye with water that comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some times gather all parts together with a circle of cloth into the eye adjusted to great prominence, and carefully be perforated by the subtle spatula that comes to the edge of the eye, and flow the humoral fluid albuginea, and descend the eye and enter soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And carefully strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the Cure of Alcunati.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called alcunati is nothing but pus which is adjusted in the eye similar to water descending and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient sit over a prepared and straight seat, and carefully take their head in your hands from two parts and make them look until you see the pus coming to the outer parts, and carefully be dried and not descend, and stop the light, and the patient sees the causes just as they saw.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of the pus is not prepared with water as we have said, then you will make the patient sit between your hands and carefully take a subtle spatula and find that spot on the panniculus cerning a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the crown (into the location that is seen), until the pus is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore when it is forgotten, then you will distill into the eye cold water in which you have mixed honey and water in which fenugreek and honey have been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And carefully be cured with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXIII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the Cure of the Water Descending from the Eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the types of water in the division and which are suitable to be poured into a sermon declaring it, therefore you will do that according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Therefore you must make the patient sit between your hands on a carpet and bind their own eye tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And carefully place your left hand near the eyelid of their own eye, if the eye in which the water is located is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And carefully take almond with your right hand if the eye is left; or with your left hand if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And carefully place the tip of the almond close to the crown by the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and carefully anoint the almond with virtue and rotate your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And carefully penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached the visible cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And carefully measure the path of the almond to the point where it measures the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; because you will see with that pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And carefully place the almond into the location where the water is, and carefully bring it down once or twice, and therefore if the water descends soon, then you will see the patient's eyesight improved over that which they previously had, and the almond in their own eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And carefully pause for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you will pause that other time before the almond is released.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And therefore when it is dried and does not descend, then you will carefully extract the almond with ease, and slowly rotate your hand with it, and carefully dissolve a small amount of clear gemstone salt in that water, and wash the eye outward; and carefully pause outside the eye cut or stoppered or lanolin infused in rose oil and egg white, and bind with water the patient's own eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we are those of our time who pause over that which is triflingly mixed with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey your almond at the entrance of the eye due to its hardness - for it is one of the men whose eye is very hard -, then you must take the spatula which is called "alberid" and has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce through with that spatula the conjuncture, and do not leave your hand in the hole, and it is only if you make a way for the almond to reach its subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And carefully introduce the almond according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work, and be prepared for the patient's sleep, a gentle descent made in the location where they will lie on their back in a dark room, and it is prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature may be aligned, and not move their head to either side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligature remain according to its disposition for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And carefully remove that in a more dark and obscure manner, and expose the hidden vision, and make them see some causes, and then return to the ligature on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this at the time of the remedies or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They had need that you would allay this by reason that the water flows more slowly through great and vehement observation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an apostema occurs, then you must remove the eye before the seventh day, and correct that with water which brings forth the apostema.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Therefore you must absolve the vision of him and pause over his face, as if he were being governed by something dark for some days, existing in the most obscure.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And carefully be taken away from that great darkness gradually and converted into its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases, the disciple is not exempt from vision a few times, and therefore you should be bold in your operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already been achieved by some of those who are in Atach, and someone said that made a fire in the Ayrac, a great perforation at which the water was sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however, you do not see this done in our land, which has perfected this water, nor do you read about it in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdans by which one can be above those who ignore these:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they were made of iron or bronze properly, and they had the extreme points of their own shape and this subtlety triangularly, the sharp point just as it is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the Cure of Carnage in the Nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born various skins which are adjusted to some cause which is assembled to the tail of a scorpion or a polygamous pes; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that represented by the shape of those pes.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it comes a cancerous flesh, blackened and of dark color; and from it also comes the flesh of a lion, not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these lion-like skins that are not fraudulent or cancerous, you must make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and anoint their nose with it, and pierce once into those skins.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And carefully extract that from the outer parts, and carefully incise into it with a sharp and subtle spatula from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed; if there remains any cause by which ablation is possible, then you must ratify this with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that no cause remains in him.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it bleeds or an apostema occurs cautiously, then you must pause in that which is necessary; or if it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cut and cauterize that until the blood is stopped and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And carefully be taken away from the nose, carefully by the incision, with water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is dry and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you must know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate according to what is necessary, then you must know that behind it there is flesh growing in the pustules of the nose, which are above the bones and have not been removed by ablation.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore it is necessary that you enter faithfully into the one who has some grossness, and annoy him in his own words, and pause between each phrase the quantity of the said or less, and generate the patient and enter one extremity of the thread into the nose with the ray or other cause which is possible to him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And since this will have been done, that he will draw his own odor into being so that it will reach the canals of the nose and be seated on his golayro, for many times children are taught at school to do this, and it is a light cause for one who wishes to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And carefully pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that will come out over the nose and the other that will remain in the nose, and carefully administer a serration of flesh with the threads that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already threaded.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And carefully extract the thread, and pause in the nose about an inch from the abstraction of the blood a quarter of an inch, and do this for three days or more until the engendered flesh is completely consumed all that remains of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And carefully pause in the nose at the end of the cause, with a leaden cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you need further cure that exists, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument, the capipurge maker, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small opened lamp, just like a small shell, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument, the capipurge maker, be flat and uncovered; to which is attached at the end, with which you will hold it when you squeeze out in oil or water whatever juice or causes are suitable.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capipurges are precious: a recipe of castoreum from the beaver, of white bayberry, of ginger, and saffron of piling pepper, of long pepper, of escarole, of epetimium, of spice anise one. And you will combine with the juice of bleda and of caul, and make pills, and one pill be tempered with water of Thebes, and be given to the patient's nose as they sit facing.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the Natures of Warts in the Extremities of the Nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times is born a warty growth on the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and increased in some days until one can see the regard of it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore you must incise that in the beginning of its appearance, and root out all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And carefully pause over the spot or cauterize or medicine which is present in that place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if it is delayed in its incision, so that it becomes magnified, then you must consider whether it is hardened, dark-colored and lacking sensation; then do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times the one who incises this apostema will develop great malice towards him whom it had affected.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apostema is of a lion-like touch and not dark-colored, and sometimes incision is possible in all that, then you must evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the spot with what exists and constrains until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the Suturing of the Nose and Lips and Ears when Continuity is Dissolved by Plague or Similarities.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation except with some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you need to deal with some cause of those, consider whether it is fresh plague with the patient's blood, and then you must adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and carefully cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then you must carefully excise each part of its visible cord until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And carefully adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen those, and over those sprinkle blood of dragon and thrice-trissed, and pause over the powder one day, or some other consolidative plaster, and bind that wrapped for two days or three, and carefully remove that and replace it with another plaster and bind that until the faithful ones are ablated, and carefully cure with engenderment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles just as we have recounted in the suturing of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread just as to your own and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the Extraction of those Causes that come in the two lips in the parts behind.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times it happens that some men in the parts behind their lips have certain hard and similar-looking apostemas resembling errors, and some of theirs are smaller and some are greater.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must convert the lips and fissures each of those hardness from all part, and carefully fill the wound with sagacious triple thread until the blood is restrained, and carefully wash it with vinegar and cure the wound with water that is stipticized, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the Incision of the Flesh Adjusted in the Gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great many times, nay, over the gummed flesh which the ancients called albulus, then it is necessary that you suspend that with once or that you hold that with the forceps and incise that as the reason requires, and let the wound bleed or run with blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And carefully pause over the spot with sagacious triple thread or other powders stipticized or excitatory.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then you must incise it secondarily and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth on the sides and fore and between the gums are adjusted rough, sharp, and some blackened, and are made citrines or greenish until they can be seen through the gum because of corruption, and are made the teeth rough.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and pause the top of him in your seat, and remove the teeth in which those roughnesses and causes like sand appear until there remains no cause in them, and this will be done with the blackness and citrinity and the others until they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this is the case that is in those of the beginning of the reason, good it is; and otherwise, then you must iterate the reason over those for another day, and second, and third until it comes to the last statement as you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of many resins of diverse forms and figures according to the preparation for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the resins with which the tooth is prepared in the part behind are another of the resins with which it is rasped between teeth according to other forms, and these forms of resins must be prepared by you which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Carefully that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and patience in total extraction from it, for there is no cause that supplies its vigor when it is extracted, for it is subtle substance entering into excuse in the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But it is necessary when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, that you firmly certify which is the aching tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and takes it to be in a healthy tooth, and you remove that one and carefully pause the pain until the diseased and aching tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this by the operation of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, since you must certify which is the aching tooth, and you know well, then it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth and the gum from all part, and carefully remove that with your own words, or with fine forceps little by little until it is concluded.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And carefully hold in it the strong forceps for good speaking or sudden fort, and pause the head of the patient between your fingers which you will hold so that they do not become annoyed, and carefully grasp the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that does not break it, nor gives greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place that below the tooth from all parts with facility and effort to remove it as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is torn or corroded, then it is necessary that you wrap that tear with cloth and strengthen it at the subtle edge of a ray so that it will not be torn in the hour of your constriction over it while holding.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work with great skill with scarification in the circuit of all part of the gum and guard your strength so as not to break it and leave a part of it, and return upon the patient for the malice that may be greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not act as some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity towards the extraction of theirs, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to be torn out, and their roots become all inflamed, or some of those, or that you extract it with some bones of the jawbone just as many times we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And carefully wash the mouth with vinegar or sour apple with salt after the extraction is done.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if it is necessary to stop the bleeding with this, just as many times it has been, then carefully squeeze out some quantity of egg white and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that egg white does not suffice, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be of long extra tip, short handle and thick, in order that they are not bent when you must work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And should be like times of thick handle so that when you grasp with those they are not bent, with short extra tips.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And should be made of Indian steel with descending tips and right-angled extra tips, and on the extra tips of those should be teeth which some intrude into others and strain by strong constriction, and sometimes the extra tips of those are in the shape of a bird's beak which has no name, it is called ciconia, so that they are guarded and have strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Extraction of Teeth and Removal of the Bones of the Mandibles Broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth which is broken with some cause, then it is necessary that you pause over the spot cut off with a border for one day or two until the spot is softened; and carefully introduce or grasp the extra tips of those which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their extra tips are made behind like lime or almond.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your own eye with these forceps or tweezers, then it is necessary that you cut away the root and uncover all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has no name, but is a small lever whose form is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should be of short extra tip thick and small, and not be encumbered so that it will not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if by this the root is forgotten, good it is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extra tip in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and with a more subtle extra tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help yourself with this instrument having two rams of which this is the form, approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the removal of teeth; for shortly after it is made with this instrument which is assembled to great force, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of a triangular extra tip bent or short, which should have some thickness, and not be encumbered so that it will not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the instruments of teeth many are so and similarly to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled craftsmen and subtle in their art, find for themselves according to this what the operation means and various diseases; for there are diseases which the ancients did not know nor pause over with proper instruments, due to the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or of other bones in the mouth is broken or splintered, then it is necessary to carefully place a plaster cast on that spot in its location where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be in some thickness small by small, and wrapped or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and carefully restore the place with medicines suitable for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small splinter in the bone, then carefully remove that from that splinter and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the Cure of Teeth Elevated above Others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are elevated above their natural form and shape is lost, and especially when they need to be removed from women and even more so from venerable old ladies; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not properly attached to another tooth, and it is not possible to secure or bind it with anything, then carefully remove it; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you must incise it with this instrument which has the following form; it resembles a pig's jawbone, and is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp extra tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be made with the instrument in which you will incise that tooth over many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that it is not confounded with another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the elevated tooth is exposed to decay, then carefully remove that with a file of Indian steel which has this form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be entirely of Indian steel and the margin very sharp; and it should have many small points just like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth becomes confounded and decayed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And carefully file that in the end, and remove it with some rasors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth whose part is broken and irritates the tongue, then it is necessary that you file away that portion until the sharpness of that fracture is removed and smoothed out, and be filled so that the tongue does not become irritated nor the word corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or collapse, and the patient cannot sustain on what they have, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then for this reason it is necessary to fill those which are strong with gold and not silver, because silver becomes green and soon turns black, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the recipe is that you take the filling and take twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, and carefully increase with two twists of the filling between two damaged ones, or if one or many, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And carefully repeat the process into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And carefully bind with the filling that you should strengthen the roots of the teeth so that they do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And carefully insert the extra tips of the filling with forceps or tweezers, and add those to each location by gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And carefully leave it as straight as Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loosened or broken, then strengthen that or those with another filling in such a manner throughout its entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just as these are linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one returns or two return to their places, and are recreated just as we have described, and remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only a skilled and knowledgeable craftsman can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable for some cause of cow bones, and it is made from them just like the form of a tooth, and it is placed in a location where the tooth falls out, and it is strengthened just as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the Incision of the Ligament Which Goes to the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which goes to the tongue sometimes or is natural in those who are born with it, or accidental and happens by chance due to a wound that has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, his existing head in your sight; and lift up his tongue, and carefully incise that ligament nerve according to its latitude until the tongue is freed from its recent stiffness.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if in that area there is some hardness or nodulation, and this is due to the consolidation of the wound, then you should take a knife and carefully cut it along its latitude until you have divided the ligament and dissolved the nodulation.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that there is not a fissure made in the skin of the flesh, and that you do not cut too deeply and come out with blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And carefully wash the vestige of the incision with warm water or vinegar or cold water, and carefully pause after leaving the tongue to relax; this is the way that the patient should leave the tongue relaxed each night so that it will not be consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, pause over the spot with a piece of lint; but if the blood flows, then carefully cauterize the spot with a caustic lotion that is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And carefully cure it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of Ranula below the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, below the tongue, an abscess forms like a small swelling that prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and very little it is magnified until it fills up the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth and examine the abscess in front of the sun.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if it appears to be a dark or black, hard swelling that the patient does not feel, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it appears to be declining towards whiteness, with moisture, then you should put a sponge into it, and carefully incise that part with a subtle spatula, and remove the entire swelling; and if blood flows during your operation, then pause above a piece of lint, so it is vetriol, until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And carefully return to your work until you have completely treated it with the remedy, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that part with another treatment suitable for this, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the Extraction of Abscesses from both Ears and that which is nothing in the Gullet and other Abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it occurs in the Gullet, so are the glands which are assembled together, those which protrude outside and are called two Ears, those which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you should consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, without sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron for the flow of blood; before leaving it to ripen, and either you will remove it or break it off by yourself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, smooth, and the root of it is subtle, then that which must be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already settled down and has reached complete rest or if it has diminished with some diminution; and then have the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head in your sight, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of the patient below with an instrument very noble which has this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it is made of silver or iron, and is subtle like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you grasp with that tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and you gaze upon it with your own eyes, then take hold of it and place it in the amnion, and pull it out to the outside parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another thing that pulls some cause of the tunics, and carefully cut with an instrument which has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled like forceps, however the extra tips of it are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is made of Indian steel well embedded.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your present, then carefully cut with a spatula which has this form of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one notch, carefully cut the other in the same manner of cutting, and then have the patient gargle with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if bleeding occurs, gargle with decoction of scorsa of milgrana or of myrtle leaves and similar to those of the causes stiptic until the flow of blood is stopped, and then carefully cure that part until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there are other abscesses in the gullet besides those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said in the incision of two notches evenly.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was situated in her gullet, which abscess was tending towards a dark color, without sensation, and which had already closed the gullet of hers, and the woman was breathing very tightly, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and if I had not acted for one day or two, she would have surely died.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already penetrated so deeply that it had eaten through two ridges in order to come out through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I carefully cut the fistula and remained in one of them, and pulled it out, and pulling out was a great portion, and then I carefully cut that part of which the other hole understood, and then I had to force her mouth open, and comprehended her tongue, and then I placed the instrument in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I carefully cut out a great part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the gullet of that woman was absolutely cured, and she began to drink water soon after, and then I prescribed food for her, so I did not cease cutting out from that abscess many times for a long time, and successive abscesses occurred in place of it, which I cut into until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I mixed and cauterized the gullet of hers, thus adding nothing more; and then I walked away and didn't know what God had done for her through me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the Incision of a Hovel when it is Abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh descends to the hovel, and it is abscessed and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the posterior part thick and rounded, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with the remedy that we have said in the division, and your cure does not take hold, and indeed sometimes the abscess becomes stagnant and is subtle, then you should cut out that which is thickened and rounded; and if it is of such length, and is bloody, dark-colored or black, and there is no sensation to it, then you should tremble at the incision of it, because in that case there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you cut out that part according to the manner which I have said of its whiteness and length, then you should make the patient swallow and press her tongue with an instrument whose form is described in the incision of two notches; and place the instrument on the notch and pull it down, cutting it with one of the instruments which are described in the incision of two notches.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not cut out that part unless it is adjusted to the natural term without addition, for if you cut too much, you will destroy their own speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then use the same remedy which we have recommended in the incision of two notches, and cure that part until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then you should use your skill in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cauterizer in that place is nothing but with sharp water, and it is that you pause the head of the patient in its own sight, and carefully press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and fill it with living cause, and pause it not thick or subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extra tip of it should be in the concavity where the medicine is placed, just like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient will lie down on his own side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that part may flow through the intrinsic medicine, in order to prevent any cause from descending onto the gullet of it and to cleanse it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then carefully take your hand and the medicine, and express it on the uvula for about an hour's space until you see that part being darkened and calmed down by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a hollow reed until the cloth sticks to that reed, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it be for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then cauterize the abscess with a cloth wrapped around the uvula, and cleanse it with that cloth soaked in the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with embrocation, and gargle inwardly until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is more saved than incision and more free from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	And sometimes the uvula is cured with this remedy which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is treated with subfumigation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, Arabic gum, chamomile, and similar herbs to those of the plants, and mix all these causes or some of them together in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar water, and boil; and let the pot be well stirred with decent stirring, and let there be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which is placed an instrument made of iron or silver according to this manner.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula on the concha, until the uvula is very obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this remedy many times until it is dry, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, for it would too much fit into the abscess, and you should not do so, but rather declare the abscess of him first.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you don't have this instrument present, then take a reed and shape it into the extremity of it a hood of cotton, in order that the mouth of the patient may be covered, for the closeness of the cotton prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the Extraction of Thorns and that which adheres in the Gullet and other Causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times things adhere in the gullet or thorn of the pharynx or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract what is apparent from those things, above which the sight falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, in order that it may be declared to you what is in the gullet.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden from you in the gullet, then you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because very strongly the attached cause of the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or that the patient would take a piece of nap or of razit of lettuce or one bunch of bread, or take a piece of dried sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then have the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take a snake and tie it tightly with thread, and then place it inside and later extract it; or take a pipe and insert it and later pull it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not forgotten with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a ray, a little one, and in the extremity of it there should be a concavity which you insert into the patient's gullet with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And it will make the patient's head rise up and look towards you, and be careful that the touch of your hand on the patient's neck, for so that the bone or the spine will end up in the way or that the patient will put their hand on it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But meanwhile the patient will insert it [the instrument] into me, through their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and end up in the lower part, and pull out their hand with the instrument above, all according to the quantity prepared there until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Extraction of Blood-sucking Worms attached to the Gullet.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood-sucking worm is medicated with the remedy we have said in the division of cures with medicines and it does not take hold, then consider the patient's gullet to be in the sun, because you have comprehended the tongue of him with an instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you find the blood-sucking worm, extract it with a small forceps or subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it [the blood-sucking worm] by that means, then take a concave reed and insert it into the patient's gullet, and carefully pause in the concavity of the reed an ignited iron, and do this many times (until the blood-sucking worm is dead and has come out of the gullet) and abstain from giving the patient water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full vial of cold water, and open the patient's mouth with it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not make any cause or trouble in it, and waste no time drinking from that water for an hour more with your own hand, because the blood-sucking worm will soon sense the water flowing.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cymets or asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and it will come to be so.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another way of performing the operation in suffumigation of that, namely: take a pot in which there are ignited coals and cover the pot with a cloth in the middle of which is a hole; and compose the extremity of the instrument in that hole; and then place above the suffumigation; and have the patient open their mouth to the extremity of the canula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood-sucking worm, because the blood-sucking worm will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't work, then you must repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient water, and make them eat salty and bitter causes, and not drink any water, and so it is necessary that with this regimen everything should be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood-sucking worms are extracted from the gullet when seen; and it is similar to forceps like those, except that there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The one which is placed in the gullet, and the extremity of it is similar to a stork's beak, which is grasping, in which there is sharpened lime, so that when you grasp any cause, it will not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon in warning about abscesses and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the remembrance of them, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And thus diverse in perforation and section of them by two manners, of which one is according to the species of abscesses themselves; and because we comprehend of the moistures.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is according to the locations in which they occur in the body, because an abscess that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs at the anus; and an abscess that occurs in the fleshy part of the body is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And besides, some abscesses are such that they do not need to be perforated, but rather should be left to mature and heal on their own or complete their natural course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses that need to be drained when they are crossed, and not mature according to their natural course, such as those that occur near joints, for an abscess that occurs near a joint is prolonged in its own way until it reaches the circuit of the joint, and very soon corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a main limb, and if you delay the drainage of it until it becomes inflamed to the main limb; or it is one near the anus, then drain it without waiting for it to mature; and do not perforate it with a rough instrument, but rather with a smooth one that is appropriate for the anus, so that the wound does not spread to the surrounding tissues and become elongated outside the anus, causing a fistula to form, or else be left in its final stage without being healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But it is necessary that you know the time of the drainage of the abscess, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it has matured when there is the subsiding of pain and cessation of fever, and proper decrease in swelling and pulse, and sharpness at the tip of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And then know that the drainage should be done in the most dependent part of the abscess and from the direction of the cure of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the drainage should be done through the length of the flesh or body part if the abscesses are in the fat folds or at the joints, and in places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use drainage according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, then it is better to wait until the perforation of it is confirmed through natural digestion according to its natural course, just as we have said; for if you perforate it prematurely, the body will be prolonged in its suffering and much harm will result, and very soon the lips of the wound will become hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses are perforated according to the necessity of the flesh or body part, or according to what the member demands.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer small perforations in small abscesses, and large perforations and many sections in large abscesses according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are abscesses in which the code is concave and should be cut when it is made like a bread and butter plate, in term that has already stopped, just as those that occur in clusters of boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are cut with a section having three angles; and of those is one in which it is cut like the figure of a myrtle leaf, just as the abscesses of the gangreners.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are like them, some have a round section and a lunated section, and resemble those that are similar.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But as for the one which is not like those abscesses of lions that are superficially visible, you must perforate it with a superficial or flat perforation only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, that you perforate it and do not stop until you have extracted all the pus in that hour; having extracted one part, and then covering the abscess with a dressing until the next day, and then extracting another larger part, and doing this many times according to graduation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a young person, or a woman in childbed, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the emission of pus, and very soon the patient will die, and you should open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	So guard this chapter with great caution, and carefully consider your perforation of these abscesses, for it is necessary that you abstain from plagues. Consider then whether the plague of the abscess is slight, or a flat section, then you should administer some oil or old cloth remedies; but if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you must pause in each wound until they all come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the code or has concaved it in the circuit, then you must complete it with old cloth or a thread of linen fabric, just as when you have extracted pus or roots, their moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and then process it and cure it with what is needed from the bandages until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is bleeding during the hour of your operation, then you must administer cold water and vinegar in those vessels where a linen cloth has been placed, and pause that over the location of the bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer remedies and treatments as recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a location of many nerves, then you must wrap powders in vinegar and oil that are warm, and pause them on those locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must pause powders wrapped with water and oil or with vinegar and oil, and all that should be cool within three days, just as we have said; and then you must loosen the abscess and abstain from plagues and administer to it what is needed in its cure until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the universal cure of abscesses, but according to the method of distinction which I have already said for each abscess in its own way, by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the Section of Abscesses which occur on the Scalp.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the scalp, small abscesses and species of nodes which contain tunics that are for their uses; and the species of them are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are pimples, and those that contain humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those that contain humidity similar to powder, and resembling their own kind; and those that are lapidescent, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, since the extraction of them does not cause irritation to the surrounding tissues.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is similar to this one, which is called "entromes", until you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	So if what is contained is humidity, then you should divide it with a section according to length, by making a superficial incision in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line .B. up to the line .G. Then, when the humidity is evacuated, you should excoriate that part which contains that humidity, and not leave any cause of it, for many times it returns if some cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that the wound and leave it for another day, since at that time everything will be corroded from what remains of that skin layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the process on that cloth with Egyptian ointment, second and third times if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin layer; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the form of a cross, and cutting one incision between two lips of the section and scraping off that part entirely, and exert your best effort in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your surgery causes irritation to the surrounding tissues, then do what I have previously recounted first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do with the abscess that has hardened in section and cure according to what we have said; and section on a hardened abscess is less difficult, since there is little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times there are cases of these abscesses that are on the head of certain men who do not have moisture; and this cause is because you incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and then proceeded to extract the abscess in a way that was as if it were a deaf, harsh, white pustule that could not be squeezed out, and if anyone pressed against it, it would hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not applicable to this chapter, such as those that appear on the heads of children and ears, but the section of these all is superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them, so that it is relieved to the body of the pus in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then cure those with what is needed for its cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the Section of Scrofulas which occur in the Neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits and groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is surrounded by its own tunic, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some are lapidescent, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So, when you encounter one that is well-disposed in the Touchment, whose color manifestly appears to be like the color of the code, and which is spread evenly throughout the entire part, and not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the surrounding tissues, and is not swollen, then you should incise that with a superficial section from above to below, along the line .G. up to the line .B., and scrape off that entire part, and extend both lips of the code by one incision, or by many incisions if necessary, just as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And be more cautious so that you do not cut into the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful not to cut too deeply, so that you do not adjust your hand with a false motion or wound the patient, and do not cut where it is not necessary to cut; for if you cut into the vein or nerve and forbid yourself from continuing the operation, then pause in the wound and apply vinegar or other powders which stop bleeding, strengthen the wound, and leave it until the abscess becomes calm and the wound begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire about the signs your teacher has taught you if there is any remaining cause of the other small scrofulas, and then incise those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the great vein, then you should not incise that scrofula from its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Instead, it is better to leave that alone and not touch it at all, nor incise it, until it falls out by itself without causing any harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary to adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them together as soon as possible, so that there is no remaining superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you find that there is remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then it is necessary for you to understand how to incise the root of that, and extract it and administer suturing and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofulas which contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial incision at the location where you see the abscess maturing, and pause the incision below the pus, just as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the incision with ointment and resembling those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then, when you see the wound already cleansed, cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the Section of the Pilhot (drainage) of the Abscess that occurs in the Groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They called this section "Epilhot" and there is not seen in our land any man who has practiced it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with varicose veins, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, because through this it would not be beneficial for the patient since all the veins and major vessels are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses in the mouth, groin or both ears, when the disease is not in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of epilhot to avoid the destruction which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want this, it is necessary to incise the epilhot below three circles of the epilhot, or four with a small section along the latitudinal in between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this location is suitable for section because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are nearby.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is hesitant, then it is necessary to extend the code of the groin by one incision, and then cut through the code into the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the ciphac according to what we have recounted; and it is signified on the section of the canal by the flame which is of that essence mixed with water that is broken down and by the abscess of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour is arrived in which the perforation is feared, add two lips of the code to the wound, and sew it alone except for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh healthy until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And I, Albucasis, say that the sum of this sermon which we have recounted is nothing but to see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the groin of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the artery of life has been cut off, and some go to incise the epigloss to make the patient breathe over the location of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and it is the malice of life for three days; and thus I command to dress the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my own eyes is that a servant took a hot iron and placed it on their groin and incised into the wound with it, cutting off a part of the lung's tube, and you were called to treat him, and he began to cough as if it was the dying breath, and uncovered the wound and bled out the blood which had collected from the wound small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore you confessed that he had not incised a vein nor guided it, and the air was coming from the wound, and cured it until it was fully healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And there was not a single accident to the servant except for a slight change in his voice, and then after some days he returned to his better dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the Section on Abscess which occurs in the groin outside and is called Hernia of the Groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess known as hernia of the groin is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs more frequently in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case there is no need to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental case is according to two manners of which one resembles green nodes and the other resembles an abscess made by occlusion of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to make a presumption about it as if with iron, except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed to investigate it with the said method, and if you find that it resembles green nodes, and is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it just as one would cut into the nodes, and extract it with the water that contains the skin and bursa; and otherwise, then thoroughly search all his being, and then cure the location where it needs to be cured until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the Section on the Species of Nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, many species and I have already said all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary for you to recount thus the difference between node and exitura, as it causes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that in exitura there is heat, fever, and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is calmed; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in a node there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains that ciphac lion which is on its own sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and it is made thus with a vessel, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either greenish and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as you said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So then, when you come to the cure of a node, it is necessary for you to expose it and inquire into its beginning with an instrument which is called introitus, according to what will be said in the chapter which is approaching this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid location which you find in the abscess, and then rotate the tips of the instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the code.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then, with your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the introitus and consider what is situated in the vestige of life.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the humidity that flows is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you should incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the vestige of the introitus there is no humidity, then you will know that it is green.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a section having the form of a cross according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	just as I have shown you, and suspend it with one incision, and excise the code of all parts with facility, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus, and often times it happens thus, and then you should extract it piece by piece until there remains no further cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if from that point there remains no further cause, be it little or much, the node will return to its former state.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that from that point there remains a small part, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders sharp and strengthen the wound, and pause over it where the abscess is quiet, and cure that other way until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a great node, then you should sew the two lips together and cure that with what embodies.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsating vein is opposite to it, or not pulsating at all, then you should stop and cover the location of the gauze which is like vitriol, and let that stretch for two days or three until the wound becomes quiet and the ebullition of blood subsides; and then return to incising what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the Forms of Instruments Necessary in Section and Perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, the forms of introitus are three species, that is to say, some are great, and some are medium-sized, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of great introitus is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of medium-sized introitus is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small introitus is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Are made of iron, with a rounded end, and a curved extremity, so that the instrument may be inserted into abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of instruments, and they are called "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And these are three species, that is to say, some are great, some are medium-sized, and some are small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large instrument, form of this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium-sized instrument, form of this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small instrument, form of this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So that they may be used for those abscesses, exitures, and fistulas, and for buboes caused by bone problems and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus, they are made red-hot, large, and sharp-pointed, like great needles with which the sinews are sewn, and they are made of copper, or iron, or silver. And the best ones are when they are made of citrine-iron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made the instruments of black lead, which are adapted to those who wish to open up the fistulas in the convolution of which there are reflections, that are reflected into their lightness with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And these are three species, that is to say, some of them are long, and some medium-sized, and some short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the great instrument made of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized instrument made of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small instrument made of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are many species, that is to say, some are simple, with only one curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And among them there are needle-shaped instruments, and there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those there are needles that have two curvatures, and there are three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those there are needles that have three curvatures, and there are three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a great simple needle, form of this:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple needle, form of this:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a great needle-shaped instrument:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium-sized needle-shaped instrument, form of this:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small needle-shaped instrument, form of this:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a great needle that has two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized needle that has two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small needle that has two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a great needle that has three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized needle that has three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small needle that has three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and there are three species, that is to say, some are great, some medium-sized, and some small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a great scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of these instruments with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not paused in such a way that it is done gently in the excoriation of nodes to avoid cutting into a vein or nerve, and for this reason the patient should be healed and then have tranquility a little due to the adaptation which is found to be necessary for the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of ligatures, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small, as well as those of very fine threads.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a great ligature:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium-sized ligature:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small ligature:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Are made of copper and resemble a thread which is also made of gold.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is at the extremity that there is a small puncture made with a spatula hidden and in which runs the threads outside and inside, when you want, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the threads that make up the perforation of abscesses and do not touch the patients, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of drains with which the flow of blood is absorbed, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Are made of citrine-iron, rounded with some length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these species of drains, great, medium-sized, and small, be used by you in order to absorb the flow of blood with speed when needed, and then when your primary intention is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you should not use these drains to absorb blood in all parts of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy locations, such as in the groins of the thighs and shoulders, and in the armpits and breasts, and similar to theirs, the fleshy humors.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes they are made from those instruments small and similar to little scissors according to this form; by which the blood is absorbed when it is done through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made rounded according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of men's breasts which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become inflamed as they begin to sleep when they are tired, and then the breasts become inflamed, and similar to those of women, and full of abscesses, distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for the one who suffers from this, it is necessary to incise these with a lunar section according to this form, between the lines of .B. and .G., and then excise the entire tumor, and then fill the wound with an encarnative medication, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suturing, and cure that one until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast descends to the partitions and is softened by its magnitude just like in women, then it should be cut into two halves, each with a scar similar to a lunar section, where each one contains the end of the other, until the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line from .B. to .G. And then excise the code which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer that which we have said about suturing and those powders which are necessary for healing until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which needs to be cut because of the unrest of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a submergible poultice in corrosive agent and leave that one until the corroding substance that remains from the grease has disappeared, and then cure that one until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses that come from behind the titillium.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those abscesses that come from behind the titillium are of the species of scrophulae, hard ones, which contain a sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of these abscesses contain moisture; and those that contain moisture must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when all the blood that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then you should fill it with a poultice and let it rest until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the poultice should be stopped and cured with a suitable application of a poultice to the wound, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and scrophulae, then you should cut on it as we have said in the section on scrophulae in like manner.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended to such an extent that it seems to be putrid, then administer in it a cauterization according to what we have said previously.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of abscesses that occur through artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the code is consolidated which is above it, then many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it can be known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: for when an abscess is caused by an artery, it is long and aggregated in the anterior part of the body; and if you press the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a stridor there.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is caused by a vein is round about the manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this abscess is an error, and more so in those that are left behind in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to avoid its cure with iron, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But in that which is caused by the inflamation of the orifice of the artery, cut in the code section along its length; and then insert the section with needles and tie it to the artery, and deliver it from the tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then make an incision on that and have the needle go through to the other side, and strengthen the artery with double ligature in two places, — which cause will be a guide for your extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then push the location between two ligatures with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is let out and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which the pus is generated until the ligatures fall away; and then cure that with suitable applications to the wound until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is caused by an incision of a vein, then you must take with your hand as much of the abscess and its code as is possible to you, and then introduce the needle behind the location which you have kept with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that thread double so that you can extract that from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with two ligatures according to what we have said to you about the ligature of two parts on both extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the ligature with that needle behind all the abscess, and strengthen those ligatures in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then cut the abscess in the middle of it until when it is settled there, you will incise the excess of the code, and let that which remains be tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over the poultice which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and administer the cure which is made with some and applications until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	In the same way as an abscess occurs in an artery and a vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in nerves when it occurs in their percussion or occurs due to excessive labor, and by similar causes.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the most part of the places of the assistants or of the ankle, or in any place where the joints are inflamed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a great abscess, and it resembles the color of another flesh, and it is in the greatest parts of the body, disposed of its own kind, and when it is stretched to its utmost vehemence, one feels in it as if the patient were in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the anterior part of the body, and therefore it is left behind the code, and it is swollen to all parties and does not go to the parts before or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be incised with iron, for it would very easily lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or forehead should have the code sectioned with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then take it with forceps and excise it from the roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with needles, and excise it, and then stop the bleeding; and adjust the wound with suturing, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of abscess which occurs in the cheek that occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	I have observed in some men many times in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungals by similarity to those with fungi, from whose roots is subtle and the head of that is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those who is small, and it is of those who is very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in the belly of it there were two fungi-like things, which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between them white, with thin roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those had turned inward and were splitting open, and moisture was flowing from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised them and carried away one in a weight of 18 ounces. and the other weighed 1 ounce.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of their fungus is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you will incise them with a spatula late, and they should be in your presence over fire, because many times the section of it is expelled much blood; and if you see the blood flowing, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is pale and tremulous, beware of incising with iron; but rather take a leaden thread, freshly made, and strengthen it in that fungus, according to the manner which we have said; and let it be left for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead thread greatly in that fungus, until it is excised and falls away by its own natural labor.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the fungus is of large roots, then in the incision of it there may be some cause for fear and dread, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But possible is that you excise most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure that until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to excise a fungus which is of dark color, with little sensation, and little regard, for it is an abscessed cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will remember this as a warning to others.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of an eminence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An eminence of the navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the skin which is on the belly, and you see it as a film or blister according to how it develops in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by constricted wind in that place.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the skin and swelling of the film, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and you will see various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the eruption of the blister, then the situation of that with the liquid that we have recounted, but with more violent diversity, and when you press it with those fingers it is hidden, and then returns; and very quickly it is in its place, and it is magnificently swollen many times with great pain and violent labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain and it is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted or creased.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears declining into blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to raw flesh, then it is a great and large abscess, hard and thick, and is filled according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to wind, then the touching of it is painless.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you consider then if the eminence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or wind; and then it is necessary that you be prohibited from the cure of it, because there is fear and dread in that as I have taught you in the chapter where I mentioned the abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the navel is due to the blister or film, then you must command the patient to hold their breath and be still extended; and then sense with your tentacle in the circuit of all the navel, and then command it to be turned towards between your hands on its back, and then circle with a spatula late around the navel on the location which you have signified with your tentacle; and then extend most of the abscess into the upper parts with large needles; and then tie in the circuit with strong thread or with waxed cord and the manner of tying decent.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then make the middle of the abscess extended over the ligature and introduce the said finger into that indicated spot and seek out the blister; and if you have found it or guarded it by the ligature, then you must extract the remaining part and impel the blister towards the outer parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the film, then take it with needles; and excise the excesses of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle around that much, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and introduce the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, so that they will penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the location until the flesh extends and falls away by itself; or excise it when it is subtle and can be pried loose, and then cure that with water as needed, until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence of the navel is due to raw flesh or moisture in it, then you must conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture which you find there, and then cure that with water as needed and consolidate the location.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of a cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division, about the species of cancer and how it is to be treated with medicines, and what should be avoided in treating it with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we have also said that cancer is generated through excessive and careless treatment of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some times cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as breast cancer or scirrhous cancer and its like, which are located on the limbs and can be completely removed, especially when it is first starting out small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, it is not worth attempting to treat it, for you cannot heal it nor have I seen anyone else do so, nor can it be cured.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in this case is when it is located as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge with black cholera some times, and then sign him, if it is found to be a manifest replenishment.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation for the operation, and prohibit in the track of needles those which are necessary for it; and then concave from all parts with a good code of examination so that there is no remaining cause of the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And then let the blood flow, and do not stop it slightly, and press out the places, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you encounter resistance from thick blood in an incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter LIV.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the Cure of Hydrocele.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted in the division, about the species of hydrocele of water, and their signs, as well as the cure for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of timpanists or to the species of hypoarchaeus, because this is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydrocele timpanistre with medicines and do not confirm your medicine, then consider, because if the patient is already debilitated, or has another malady, such as in his lungs or bowels and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate him with iron, for fear is over it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of excessive virtue, and in him there is no other malady except for hydrocele alone, and he is neither young nor old, then the manner of operation for it is that you lift the patient between your hands, and minister to him appropriately, by draining his belly with his own hand, filling the water at the exit from the penthyl, and then take a spatula with spines according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	be two sharp edges long, with a sharp extremity like a spatula; but however it should be in there some smallness little by little, so that in the operation on him it does not go into the blister and lead to trouble.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydrocele is from one of the blisters, because then it is necessary that you with the section go away from the navel by the quantity of three said to the left parts, in the right of him above the pentyl.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocele is due to illness of the liver, then your section should be left-handed from the navel by three said.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to bad luck, then your section should be in the right hand.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary that your section be on the side which the patient wishes to lean towards, so that the superfluities do not flow towards that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the entire code with the instrument, and then enter into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the code and the siphon, and you excise that; and if it is the quantity of one fingernail or thereabout.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches the location where you want it to be, and that is the place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and enter with an instrument whose shape is this:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or of iron or of lead, with a small hole at the lowest part of it, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the extremity of it is incised according to the manner of a feather, just as we use to say:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the extremity of it is an annulus, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that annulus will soon rest upon the instrument, therefore evacuating from the water in the middle quantity, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary at that time, very quickly the patient will die by resolution of their animal spirit, or you will be led to it, which is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from it according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the patient's virtue, the pulse of it and the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is caused because it is retained by the code which retains the hole that is on the skin of which I have recounted to you that you should pierce it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then iterate the instrument on another day if you find the patient tolerating this, and extract a small quantity of water, and make it so for some days with caution, and beware of error until there is only a little water remaining.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and leave a large quantity of water, then cure that with burial in hot sand, and much sweat in bath, and wait for it under the sun for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the gallbladder and liver nearby the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in this, which is preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the Cure of Children Whose Bladders Do Not Perforate Naturally.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some children are thus from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or it is a narrow hole or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to pierce it with perforation as soon as it is born with a subtle spatula according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the hole a small key of lead and tie it, and let it be for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, be removed and washed; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not let it close.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that of which the hole is narrow should be treated with a lead key, as we have said, for many days until it is expanded.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are led astray, which cause is because of them, that which is born and grows is at the end of the head of the urethra, so that it cannot urinate into the outer parts, until the urethra raises itself with its own hand to the upper parts; and it is not a generation, therefore the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a miserable disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in this is that the patient should be placed on his back, and then extend the head of the urethra with your left hand with a vehement extraction, and incise the head of the head of the urethra at the location of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as it is incised with a feather or if you remove some part, so that the middle of it becomes similar to the head of the urethra, and the hole falls in the middle place according to what is necessary.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of bleeding, because many times it happens like this; and pause for him as much as is necessary to stop the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the Ablation which occurs in the Prepuce at the head of the Urethra and of Corruption, Blackness, and Adherence of the Prepuce to the head of the Urethra.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this ablation occurs in the urethra and is an eminence of flaccid flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant, and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, requires that you suspend with a subtle needle and remove it until it is completely gone; and then pause above it, submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then, cure it with divine ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ablation is malignant, of dark color, then you must administer cauterization near the incision and the ratio of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the ablation is in the prepuce of the head of the urethra, uncircumcised, and one part of the ablation is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then you must remove the ablation that is inside first, so that it is consolidated; and then you cure that outside, because when you cure that together with the prepuce, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also it often happens in the genitals and prepuce, blackness and corruption; therefore you must conquer all that which is already denigrated and which already wants to corrupt or has already corrupted; and then apply a poultice over it, using honey mixed with meal of corn cobs and errors crushed and sifted.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure that with the other remedy until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is excessive bleeding, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because cauterizing juice is in two dispositions together, that is, in bleeding and in the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the urethra is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then it is necessary that you insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce, so that the patient may urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce with the head of the urethra (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose prepuce is sound and has not been circumcised; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) it is necessary that you excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the urethra is completely freed from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to dissect those things delicately, then it is necessary that you excise with a spatula some cause from the head of the urethra and the prepuce, and thus it is because the prepuce, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its own subtlety slightly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the urethra with a thin thread, which is already moistened in water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be cured with a warm styptic until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the Purification of Children and the Cure of that which occurs to those who have been Circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as are other wounds: but rather it is from our operation and our will, and the purpose of that is properly in children; therefore it is necessary to assign in that the best operation and way most easily lost without harm.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not teach circumcision in their sacred books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which is why you have found that most of the surgeons and barbers use to circumcise and purify with a new knife and torches; and they bind with a thread and incise with the finger.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already condemned all these methods and did not find better purification with forceps, with thread and needle that is used in purification like the fingernail, because many times the code above has fled, because the code of the prepuce has two tunics, and remains the tonic below, and very easily it is forced to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with purification made by alphecats, which is digital and used by surgeons, it is not certain that the incision of the extremity of the male member is secure, because very easily it enters into the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with fingernail, iron very easily obstructs and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the code of the child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the purification made with forceps and threads with needle, goodness, experience has revealed to me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is above is just like the sharpness that is below; and thus, when you press your hand so proportionally two sharpnesses, and inscribe it according to a comparison at one time; and it is made compression of the needle with a figure containing the code of the urethra from all parts, without any error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child remain mostly still if it is one of those who understands a little, and not do anything except to insert the needle into his urethra only so much, and leave it there until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him happy in all that manner which is possible to you, from what he receives of his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him stay between your two most established preparations, and not at all astonished; and hide the forceps in your hand or leave them on your lap, so that the child does not see those nor anyone else of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the urethra of him and blow into the code, and pull that in so that it is out of sight from the head of the urethra, and then purify that which is aggregated in it of sordes.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then bind the marked place with doubled needle, and then bind a small piece below that with another thread, and then keep it with good retention, and inscribe between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the code slightly and extract the head of the urethra; and then allow the blood to flow slowly and slowly, because it is better; and pause powder above and over the powder, pause a cloth on which a mule has been spread with warm water mixed with red oil freshly boiled; and leave that on him until the next day; and cure him with remedy until he is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for purification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Be the outer tips not cutting and the others cutting, so that there is no exit of the claw, and be the length of both sharpnesses just like the length of two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is that very easily the inner code is lost entirely or part of it escapes from the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you extend that of your hour with your fingernail in front of the abscess of the place and incise according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then take it out with a needle and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the abscess remains below the urethra, then you should leave it until the abscess is calm, and then remove that with ease, and incise according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the urethra, because it will not be affected by this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore cure that with the remedy that the wound consolidates with the powders which we have recounted in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised with the code according to measure, and obeys the parts above, then this will not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore cure that with what we have said until he is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the Cure of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made by pressure or by blood congealed, or by pus or flesh, and resembles those of what we have said about the manners of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention of it is seen to be due to pressure which is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his own knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then you should place the patient's weight on his own back and stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and the patient should strain his abdomen as much as is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, then the neck of the bladder is constricted and the expulsion of the pressure behind causes the urine to be absorbed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, then the cause is made to be violent on the patient, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction of him with an instrument which is called syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and subtle like a lion's claw, just like a quill from an ostrich with subtlety of ray long in similarity to a palm and a half, at which there is a thin thread on its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of extracting urine with that is that you take the doubled needle and insert it into the extremity of the lana or coto for good binding; and then insert the extremities of the needle into the left part of the syringe, and incise with forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the lana, but introduce it into the canula with vehemence.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on a stool, and wrap his bladder and urethra with olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe with ease into the root of the urethra; and then double the urethra above at the part of the belly; and then push the syringe inwards until it reaches the bladder; and then push that until it reaches the patient, and it is said to have reached the cause of the disease, and not done so according to this order, but rather takes a tortuous route.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the needle with the thread little by little, because the urine is drying up the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and make it for urinary cure, and use syringe, do not stop doing this and use syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient receives relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the Quality of Cathartics for the Bladder with Clamp-cedra and similar instruments which are in accordance with this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood congealed in it, or is compressed by pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines into that, then make it with an instrument called Clamp-cedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but in the extremity of it, it is deaf, i.e. it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two from one side, just like sometimes.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a concave location, in which there is water that is poured in, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, until when some cause is pulled out by it with the moistures, it is drawn towards it, and when it is expelled, it is drawn towards it, and when it is long, as clamp-cedra does, which is filled with naptha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to draw out moistures from the bladder, insert the extremity of clamp-cedra into the moisture, and pull towards it the water that is poured in above, because the moisture is drawn into the concavity of clamp-cedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of clamp-cedra into the urethra according to what we have recounted in the syringe; and then pull out the moisture with water that you pour in, because that moisture flows into the bladder at once, and the patient is cured by it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The Form of the Subtle Catheter by which the Bladder is Catheterized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with the head being similar to a small feather, and having a thin thread at its end.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a vessel of motion, and pour into it the moisture that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and then tie it between two with a strong ligature made of double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the moisture and stretching downward until the patient's disease is cured because that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a bag made of papyrus and make it into a circle; and perforate it all over its roundness; and then insert a strong thread into those holes, just like they are revolved; and then add the circle in such a way that it is added also to the future, so that you put into it what you want from the moistures, and oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that onto the instrument and do with it just as you did with the bladder, and express it onto your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the Extraction of Pus.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the kinds of pus and its cure with medicines, and the difference between pus generated in the lungs and pus generated in the bladder, and the signs of it.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said the pus in which operation with hand and section occurs.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the pus generated in the bladder properly is that which is formed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you should narrate it with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So I say that pus generated in the bladder mostly occurs in children; and one of its signs is that the urine which comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it like sand; and the patient frequently wipes his urethra, and many times pulls back his penis, and then stands up straight; and with this you will know that there is a discharge from those parts.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to heal the children of this disease until they have reached 14 years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young, it is mid-term because it is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which pus is more abundant and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of this disease, it is necessary at first that we purify the patient with a catheter which extracts all the abscesses that are in his bowels; for that abscess sometimes prevents the evacuation of the pus from the bladder.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient should be pressed with his own weight and continued in a comfortable position for so that the pus descends to the bottom of the bladder, or else it may jump from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that person sit between your most prepared things and those of him be left the things of his, so that the bladder is made to decline towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then pour it out all at once.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the pus in space, then you should cut into it immediately with section above it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not find the entire discharge of your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil the indicated digit of your left hand, whether the patient is a child or a young adult, and insert that into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And pour out the pus until it remains below your said finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon it with your said finger and expel that out to the external parts below the location where you made the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with her right hand; and command another assistant to extend the patient's legs upwards with her left hand, and with her other hand to relax the code which is below the legs, in the part of the location where the section is being made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatula which is incident from which this is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut into it where there is between the anus and the legs, not in the middle location, but before the left side of the cleft; and let the section be on that pus and your finger be in the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the external section may be wide and narrow inside according to the quantity that you extracted from the pus, and no greater, for fear that too soon compresses your finger which is in the anus, and forgets the difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from the pus there is some which has an angle and margins, for which the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that pus, it is like a glans, and is round, and is made for easier extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is this kind with angles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if not, then it is necessary that you gently push on it, or that you strengthen on it with decent gestures, the extremity of which should be like a file with which you strengthen on the pus, and do not dislodge from there; or that you insert below it the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot push on it, then you should enlarge the hole a little bit; and if you see a flow of blood, cut in strength with vitriol thread.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the pus is more than one, then at first you should push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it onto that; and then push a little bit further; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pus is very great, then ignorance is that you insert it with a great incision, for it will happen to the patient one of two causes: either death or obstruction of the urinary distillation continuous, therefore the location is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion of it until it is forgotten, or shape in the fracture of it with forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with the juice of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause over that cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rosinated oil and cold water, so that the abscess may be calmed.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then resupply the patient with his own bed, and do not loosen the bond until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wrap the wound with water and much oil, and then cure that with divine balm and devil's balsam until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there occurs an abscess that is calm, adjusted and corrosive, and it resembles as if the blood is frozen in the bladder with congelation, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the egress of blood with urine), then therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left it will provoke the bladder to corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all species, according to what is necessary for its cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And it is necessary during the entire course of the cure that you keep both things in order and adjust the medicines which are placed on the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pus is small and is in the urethra, and is stuck there, and the discharge of urine is prohibited, then cure that with what I recommended before you reach section, for many times by this cure you are accused of section; and now it has been tried, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron with an alfelut, from which this is its form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thread, and tie it onto that urethra below the pus so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing with ease until the perforator comes to that pus.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then turn the perforator with your hand in that pus little by little, and you pierce through the hole until it comes out on the other side; for the urine is soon absolved.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is left of the pus from the outside part of the urethra, because it is torn, and forgotten with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not prepared by you for some reason which prohibits it, then tie one thread below the pus, and another thread above the pus.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then insert on top of the pus in that urethra between two threads.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the bond and purify the congealed blood which is in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the pus, except that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread above, only because when the thread is loosened next to the extraction of the pus, the code returns to its place and closes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above that you raise the code to the upper parts, or that you return to your previous statement, and close the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the Extraction of Pus from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pus in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you see pus in some of those women, then it is difficult to cure it, and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman is very proud.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you do not find a woman well knowing that she does not understand if she confides in a doctor when she is chaste, or one of those women who are married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is because you do not have a woman well knowing this art, mainly the operation with hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section on pus in women is too far from the location of the pus, so you need to make a previous incision, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity prompts you to this, then it is necessary that you take a married woman who is well knowing, and little is troubled.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek out a midwife who is quick and subtle, or present an elderly woman well experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has parted from this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then present that one and command them to do all this which you will instruct them to do, from the inquiry about the pus to the beginning; which cause is that they should regard whether the woman is a virgin, then it is necessary that she put her finger into the urethra and seek out the pus.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she finds it, cut it below her finger, and then command her to insert something onto that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the woman's private parts and inquire about the pus, since she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if she finds it, then it is necessary that gradually she relaxes that from the bottom of the bladder to the parts below with the summit of her virtue until it comes out at the root of the urethra.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert onto that an apposition of the middle of the private parts, at the root of the urethra, from which some part may be paraded and centered the pus in that part, and the said finger should not be removed from the pus cut below.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at first; and then insert a ruler onto that section, and if you feel the pus, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know will be extracted from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the kinds of pus are many: for some is small and great, and hard and sharp, and long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you know how many kinds there are of it by this which I signify about that which you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust with vitriol thread and keep it for one hour until the blood is stopped, and then return to your operation until the pus is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare with you the instruments which I say in the extraction of pus in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery which is inserted, then you pause powder on the place and strengthen it with powders and strictura descent, and do not repeat this; and leave the pus and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And then when the sharpness of the blood is ceased after some days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation until the pus is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of Section on Hernia in the Groin.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia in the groin is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white pouch which is below the codes of the genitals containing the humor, and it is called a pouch.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper fold of skin which nature has prepared for the passage of humor, so that what is already another humor may be contained; and it is the code of the genital between the white pouch which we have said, and not just a pouch but rather a sac.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, for which reason this material pours out into them; and sometimes it occurs through a blow or fall on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors, for the color of it either declines to yellow or to reddish-brown, or is red, or blackish, or white and watery, and that is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of moisture is located are these: for if it is in the white pouch which we have said, then the abscess is rounded and declining a little to length like the figure of humor, and appears the genital, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper fold of skin, then the abscess is rounded with a part of humor and by this one estimates that it is another humor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the code of the genitals and the white pouch, then cats are left below the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you examine the color of the moisture in the abscess with the instrument whose form is preceded; and according to what it is found in the vestige of the instrument, judge from that whether it is inside or out.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And then when we come to the cure of it with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be flesbotomized if this is possible for you, and sometimes wash the body thoroughly.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then be resupinated on your back over some cause or other, and pause below with many cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of him, which extends his hand to one or two hands to the code of the genitals and the part of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula flat and cut the code of the genitals from the middle location by length, approximately to the pubic line.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And then make the section according to right and equal distance from the line that marks the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white pouch comprehended.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And then scrape it, and observe, and take care to not insert anything; and your scraping with which you scrape away by part, as if it were suspended in the humor more and subtly examine the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the white pouch full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two lips of the section with scissors, and extend the white pouch to the upper parts; and do not touch the code of the genitals comprehended, and insert the white pouch in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And then insert it with its totality or in pieces, and primarily the subtle part of the side, for if you do not scrutinize exactly the insertion of it, there is no secure guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the humor proceeds from that outside of its code during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the pouch, return inside and adjust the two lips of the code of the genitals with suture, and then cure it just as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the humor corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate the vessels which are sore the suspensori, and extract the humor, and then cure it with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, insert into that part according to what you did in the other, and if it appears to be one operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you wash away the blood, and enter into the sections linen submerged in oil or rose-colored oil; and pause before another linen which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the miracle of the belly; and pause above doubled cloths and powders, and tie those above with a ligament which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and then the two cloths are pressed and filled with Carmelite wool according to this resemblance; and the extremities are made with which it is wrapped in cloth or damp wool, and added to the stretcher in the waistband of the drawers, and one of the extremities takes hold of the cleft from above to below, and the second takes hold of the part of the pubic line, and two extremities above two couches and two other extremities above two agonists, and all the structure is adjusted in the waistband of the drawers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cauter in the place of section with iron; and it is that you take a cauter cutlery subtle and insert it into that code of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white pouch containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cauter in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled in Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce into that pouch, and ignite until all the humidity is eliminated.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the pouch with scissors, and scrape with scissors, and scrape with a subtle cauter that is ignited; and insert it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and take care of the humor so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is most safe and longest-lasting in terms of bleeding, and better than an operation with section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter contrary opposition in the form of abscesses that cauterize at the time of section or cauterization, or bleeding, then it is necessary that you cure what contrariety arises to you by means of the cure which corresponds to him according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is poor and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what we have recommended above; and it is when you are certain, by means of the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is necessary that you place the patient on some elevated bench, and then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of him with a flat spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And be the perforation wide enough that all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then pause above the location of the cut and tie it off, so that the remaining water flows out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrariety is to the egress of water at that hour, then you pierce it: and this is not done except by means of which the white fold in the orifice of the wound makes contrariety and prohibits the emission of water, then it is necessary that you put into the wound a pain or instrument with which water is extracted from drops, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opposite direction of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and is accumulated after about 2-3 months or around those; and as it accumulates, then it should be pierced according to that same manner, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Section on Fleshy Hernia and its Cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section on this hernia, there is fear of being lost to destruction in the greater dispositions; for which reason I have beheld the departure of him and being saved by that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are reminded of the operation on this one, and the kinds of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So I say that the abscesses are born in those whose genitals are composed and it is made thus by many causes: either because of acute and sharp superfluity which is poured into the genitals, or because of trauma.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and not found in him pain, and it is a grave abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very often it is a lapified abscess, the color of which is dark, and there is no sensation to him.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by constriction of the arteries, and by inflation of those vessels as if one could already feel a recollection of him, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with those fingers mentioned above; and it is not necessary that it touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But what is caused by inflammation of veins is not dispersed from him for any reason, even when compressed with those fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species, you make a section and on the other flesh; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and then extend the humor to the upper parts, and extract it from the white pouch, and deliver the suspensorium of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensorium more than you deliver it from all part of the parts of the humor.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the humor is already consolidated in those fleshly parts, then it is necessary that you extract the humor and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the pouch or between what is between the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that adhesion and insert it with a rounded incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a native flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that is from him, and extract the humor just as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with linen impregnated in rose-colored oil and wine; and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the Cure of a Hernia that is of Vine.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vine is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a shoot with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult for the patient to move, exercise, and walk.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this disease, it is due to fear because of which there is a recollection.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary that we say operation on this one according to what the first ones do.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to place the patient on an elevated bench; and then compress the suspensorium of the testicles into the left parts; and then insert the code of the genitals with those fingers mentioned above with the vessels that are proved by the verge; and hold those other ministers, and stretch them with a vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert it with a flat spatula, making a transverse section in the right of the vessels, until the vessels are discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off all the parts just as we have said in extraction of artery which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place an awl in those with a double thread, and tie it in the first of the places where the vine is located, and tie it again another time in the last of their.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those in the middle location by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the fetid and corrupted humidities.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with the cure of other wounds in which you want to be generated by so that the vessels which nourish one of two genitals may fall, for it is not bad for this reason.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the vine affects all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles by this means are connected to the vessels, in order to be deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and be wasted, or that they become rotten because they are not joined with them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the Cure of an Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is due to a section that goes into the pouch extended over the belly on the side of the agonizers of the miracle of the belly, so that the bowels of that rupture go into some of the bowels.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the pouch or of excrescence from him, and it occurs in these two species by many causes: or percussion, or by shout, or by cry, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by similitude.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the pouch, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess equal in size with the preceding one because the pouch compresses the bowel.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of him is when it is due to section of the pouch, because at first it makes cause a vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess diverse in appearance below the code propagated in appearance, and this is by emission of the bowel, and his body to the parts outside of the pouch.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is forgotten with the bowel membrane, and this is called intestinal hernia "cirbel".
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made in ventosity, and sometimes it runs into the bowel fissure, and there it is retained, and this is at great peril of the patient, and sometimes it causes very bad pain and especially when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the danger in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation on that is that you command the patient to straighten out his bowel with his own hand towards the parts outside of his conquered territory if he obeys his returnment, and then it should be elevated above his back between your hands, and lift up his legs from him.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the code which secures the code of the testicles to the upper parts, and insert the code of the testicles all along; and then place it in two lips of the section scissors according to what you need to fill the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget the humor from that.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape off those pouches which are below the code of the testicles, until the white pouch is revealed from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you enter the finger mentioned above into that which secures the testicle, between the white pouch and the one below it, which is below the code of the humor, and between the second pouch and absolve with that adherence which is in the part behind the humor.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then take hold of the code of the testicles with your hand, and stretch out the white pouch on the left side, and lift up the humor with the pouch to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with those fingers mentioned above, so that there be no cause for the bowel to be enveloped in the white pouch.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find some cause from him, then you compress it to the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick thread of 10 threads, and insert it into the last part of the pouch, which is below the code of the testicles, which is the section; and then insert the extremities which emanate from the thread until they are four threads, and then tie them together on some figure in the manner of a cross; and tie with that pouch which we have said that is below the code of the testicles with strong binding of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the threads and tie them with strong binding, so that some of the vessels which nourish those cannot transmit any cause by which a abscess may occur here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then pause another binding, similar to the first one, about three times; and then leave that pouch which is below the code of the testicles with the amount of greatness of the said, and insert all the remaining part in a rounded manner, and stop from him the humor.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert into the part below the code of the testicles by section of which blood and pus may flow in such a way as we have recommended above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer the linen soaked in oil to the wound; and pause there; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and sometimes the white pouch is cauterized, as we have said above, in order to prevent flux of blood, for many times those things occur) and leave the binding until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the bleeding is delayed, then let cold water be poured over it, and pause there until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with the other cure of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	Of Hernia Ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has seen anyone who was burned by the cure with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done just as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; which is that you tie up the vessels near the section over there with ease of him; and then cut in the middle place around the abscess with water that brings that about, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound according to what we have said, until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the Disruption that is made in the Anginors.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the anginors just as we have said, and it protrudes to the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is no need for the genitals to have any cause of the bowels at the genitals; and if there is, it is little; and it returns again in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, it is adjusted fissure in the pouch until it descends into the pouch; and it occurs because of the extension of the pouch which is in the anginors just as we have said, which cause is that the pouch is stretched, and then it becomes softened and the location is abscessed and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for this is with a cauterizer just as we have previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then cuts the location of the rupture of the abscesses protruding in a section by latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white pouch which is below the code until it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take a ray and pause that over the protruding part of the pouch, and press that against the belly's forepart.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then close the two protruding parts over the extremity of the ray of the pouch, and adjust with a suture one to another.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not insert it into the pouch entirely, nor extend the humor, nor any other cause just as you would know to be in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the pouch has constricted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this location, since it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of Softening of the Code of the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the code of the testicles in some men is softened because those fleshy parts that are between it are softened, and it is conducive to its regulation.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who is present in the cure to make the patient lie on his back, and insert all the code which is softened over the natural code; and then adjust two lips with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, close at the beginning the excess of the softened code with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and then cure by curing other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for a reason it has been written to me, so that I may remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except by two manners, of which one is because of the science of the doctor when he is interrogated about it, knowing the cure of him to whom it occurs; and the other manner is that many times we have needed castration of other beasts for our own purposes through those, just as with horses, oxen, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two manners: either by incision or by section through a cut.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by incision, the way of the operation is that we make the animal be cut in cold water until its genital parts are softened and tied with linen threads.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your own hand, until they are resolved and do not appear to be left behind the touchment.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by section and cut, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the code of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspenders and insert one section over each humor until two humors process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then insert those more than you will have excoriated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on the pouch of the testicles, but only the subtle pouch which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this manner of castration is better which is done by incision, because incision does not leave any cause of the testicles so that the animal desires to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodism in men is according to two manners: one is when it appears in that which is the space in the code of testicles, between two testicles, a figure like that of a woman's, with breasts.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from it flows urine which is in the code of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, it is a species: and it is that the woman's vulva on the pubis is like two testicles of a man a little bit outside, just as the male perineum and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two of men and one species of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you must insert those adjusted fleshy parts until it escapes the pressure of that, and then cure those with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine flows which is in the code of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of Leninge and Fleshy Eminence due to Causes of Women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Leninge is quickly adjusted over natural causes until it is stretched and its regulation is made firm; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to the point where it spreads like in men and penetrates into coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, it is necessary that you take the excess of Leninge with your own hand or with a forceps and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not leave any excess, especially in the region of the rectum, for fear that blood may flow.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure that with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrific of the mare until it fills that, and quickly it is emitted to the outside parts like a cock (and therefore we will call this "malautia caudata"); therefore it is necessary that we insert it just as we insert Leninge, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the Cure of Alratica.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica is when a woman's vulva is not perforated or if it is only slightly pierced.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has preceded, and it is caused either by flesh not well adjusted or by subtle or thick pouch.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the back of the mare, or in the sides of him, or in the highest part of him, or in the lowest part of him, and forbids coitus, engagement, and childbearing, and strongly forbids menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by examination of the metro-na, if the obstruction is apparent, direct it; but if it is not apparent, then search for it with the threads or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if obstruction is due to subtle pouch and is directed towards the two lips, then you must cut and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you pause over the two lips of the pulse, and then pause the threads indicated by both hands at the same time.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman lies on her back, her arms extended, and then extends the two lips with force until that subtle pouch is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take lanolin and anoint it with oil and pause that over the location, and lie down as a man by day for so that the location is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the pouch is thick and dense, then it is necessary that you insert it with a spatula or with myrtle leaves.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to fleshiness, then suspend that with forceps and insert it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And are with you the medicines that stop blood flow without biting, such as ahaemia, dragon's blood, and resin, adjusted with album of humor.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a leaden cannula wide enough to prevent the wound from being consolidated slightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for some days and administer lukewarm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural birth of other flesh, and it is necessary that you insert according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to green abscess, then do not make any contradiction with iron in any manner at the green abscess which is in the mare.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids and Tail and Red Botch that occurs in the Vulva of Women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an affection of many veins' orifices, until those veins flow with continuous blood; and when old hemorrhoids become formed and their throats are filled.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those species and signs of those, and to say that those who receive cure and those who do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and throats when they are in the back of the mare and do not appear to the sense, then in those there is no cure made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifice of the mare above which one feels sensation, are those that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the throat with forceps or with rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powderize over those the flows of blood from one of the insertable powders without biting, such as acaasia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then apply her feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make that cease in a decoction of Sumatra and scorched millet and gallberries and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take oatmeal flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make an embalmment with water on the back of him.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is stopped, it is good; and otherwise, make adhere with two poultices, and to the nipples without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take lanolin and submerge that in the juice of colicandre or in the juice of arnagloza or in the juice of guarravier with pentit vinegar and make adhere to the location; and then cure the location with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the throat is rough and needs to be treated with harsh consideration, it is necessary that you insert there what appears to you according to what I have said in the previous description.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the Perforation of Accidental Discharge in the Mare.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of accidental abscesses occur in the mare, such as green abscess, lapidated abscess, ulcers, adhubelation, erpetromenitis, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and rough throats, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and the species of those and their signs, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that you say in this treatise of cauterized abscess which appears in the mare when it is one of the abscesses that requires surgery, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the abscess in its initial stages is sharp with percussion and inflammation and fever, and at times becomes inflamed and if one feels sensation on it, then do not open it by perforation, but cure it with water that helps with maturation until the acuity of the accident subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then it is necessary that you make the woman lie on a cushion that has two cushions; and recline on her back and adjust her feet at the lowest part of the belly, and her arms be expanded, and pause her hands below her nails, and tie each one with a ligament to water suitable.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife follows directly and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the mare is opened, in the shape that will come forth according to those causes that are about to be made.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And then it is necessary when you want to administer this instrument that you make it in the shape of a ray on the back of the mare of the woman, and what is entered into the mare from the instrument is not more than the back of the mare and leads the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is greater than the back of the mare, then it is necessary that you powderize over the texture of the back of the mare so that it prohibits the entrance of any instrument into the back of the mare.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And then it is necessary that you pause the vertebrae which runs in the instrument of the left side and above, and that the minister hold the instrument and turn the vertebrae so that the orifice of the mare is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears and is touched with the hand and is lion-like and moist, then it is necessary that you dry that part of the head of him with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you pause in the wound a poultice submerged in rose oil or green oil with some stiptic properties; and pause the caustic in the section on the back of the mare.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then pause before the mare and above the pubic area a clean lanolin submerged in water in which mulberries have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then be cured within two days with ointment which is suitable for that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the mare is washed and the wound is cleaned with water and honey, and then applied with water in which is boiled root of lily or long aristology, and then returns to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the mare's udder, then it is necessary that you be prohibited from curing it with iron, having cured it with water as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to medicate children's bodies when they are sick according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs from above, and is that when you see the woman expelling at the lower partings and desires to smell the air, and above this is relieved by what is on her, and hastens the emission of the child, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the emission of the child over its head, and the secondine with that or suspended or hanging from the umbilicus.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the child's belly be compressed so that the child descends slightly because when they are born over its head, they give secondine to it, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another part is not natural and not acceptable, because when the child is born over its feet and its body is born before its head and its feet, and the hand of it one or at the foot of it, ..., or is born the head of it and its hand, or at the belly of it, and very strongly it is converted over its neck, and similar to the figures of it not acceptable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you are showing the whole figure of those, and what kind of sign is in them so that it may be signified by that and has been on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the child is born over its head by natural extraction, and that is vehement on the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already weakened, then make that cease, or that women have it, and evaporate the womb with fenugreek powder and moist oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the metro-na between the two said spatula and gap with that, or cut it with its own nail into what is in her of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be cleansed with ptilly mucus and fenugreek mucus with camomile.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it to him, and to the cleanser, that it be compressed and make it sneeze with condiments; and take his mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will soon forget.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two hands of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with small steps of ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then pause the woman on a cushion and lift her feet up, and then conceive the cushion on the ground; and the woman be held so that she does not fall from the conception.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not returned and the fetus dies, then insert those and extract the remnant of the fetus or tie the body to the hand of it with cloth and extract that with equality, because it will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The Birth of the Fetus on its Feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is born on its feet, then it is necessary that you impel them inwards, and then convert the small fetus into one, and then bring forth one foot of it and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are born into the armpits, then you command it to come forth, and make it sneeze with condiments, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then you return the small fetus little by little until it pauses according to natural figure, because that will be forgotten at a lighter birth.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take mugwort and dissolved gum, and strike everything in the mortar for good striking, and then line up with water the vulva of the woman, at the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cease in warm water until it reaches the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the lower parts of it are relaxed, then make a sub-fumigation with myrtle and pause that on it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigation is done for an hour, then you make it cease on a cushion, and then make that sneeze and extend its mouth, and take it from there, and press the lower part of her belly with gentle compression, so that the fetus will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Birth of the Fetus on its own fingers and thumbs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is born in this form, then you ease its fingers little by little; and then the woman lies on her back, and her feet hang down, and those are resting on the bed, and complete its fingers.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on her belly little by little, and then extract what is left from her feet to the ears, until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forgotten, then take her feet and move them with a vehement motion, and then press that which is above on the hypochondria little by little until the fetus reaches the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert its fingers and bring forth the fetus little by little, and command the woman to come forth until the fetus is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Birth of the Fetus sideways hanging one of its fingers.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It is eased into reduction with the hand of her, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift up the woman and make her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go, then make her lie down on the bed, and conceive the armpits of her with violent concussion, and then administer lukewarm lukewarms which we have recounted.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth is complete, then make that cease on a cushion, and then study on the reduction of the hand, and bring forth the child according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command it to compress itself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Birth of the Fetus with its fingers spread out and the fold of it on the back of the mother's shoulder.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife take the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, and make it easy for it.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and when it is equalized, then pause on the vulva of her with that which we have recounted of oil and mucus.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command it to be massaged little by little, and when you have done that, then make that cease on a cushion and command it to be inclined over the right side, and then command it to be compressed; and make it sneeze with condiments.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the prepared fetus onto the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the horror of the mother is over according to this manner, consider, and then you insert the secondine with your nail until it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and back of her, then you insert that of the umbilicus, in order that it not be retained and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the lower parts until it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and if God so wills, it will be forgotten at a lighter birth.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are sometimes born multiple times, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange and does not end well; yet there are causes of nature, and they do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And then, whether they are multiple or not, a secondine is formed, and they are separated by ciphac, distinguishing them between the ligament in the umbilic of each of those. And sometimes they are forgotten like one fetus at a lighter birth, and sometimes they are born non-naturally like what we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about the non-natural figures, then you cure those just as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and makes it so that it brings about ease and subtlety, and in tardiness, and is inclined according to all figure as it is prepared by nature leading to salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted fetuses.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed in multiples of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and up to ten, and it is necessary for me to verify that one woman aborts at the seventh month, and another has all her children, which was caused by measurement according to the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And thus it is necessary for the midwife to have knowledge of this because very much alike is similar to that, and therefore pause at that point with so many as are needed.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not forthwith extracted, and you are forced to use operation by hand, then it is necessary that you consider if the woman has a healthy virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents whereby upon her is feared destruction.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back on a bed, and have her head inclined downwards and her armpits elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the attendant shall hold that in two parts or bind it on the bed, for the sake of the body not extending too far during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and mucus, and with mugwort and fenugreek and seed of flax.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife inserts her hand with those oils and mucus into the mother's body, and then eases it in with facility, and then searches for the spot where the fingers will rest on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And finds a suitable spot: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head, and then place your fingers on the nose of it, or on the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the furrow of it, or in the places proper for the ribs, or below the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is onto the feet of it, then in the armpit or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to take the fingers with the right hand, and pause the curvature of it at that spot which is between the said bones of the left arm, and insert the hand with ease and place the fingers in some of those spots which we have said, until one comes to the cause of birth.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and place another finger or the third if necessary, for a drawing equalization, and not an extension according to its straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus be good at all part, for that the delivery of it is alleviated as if made in debt towards the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife must anoint some of its bones with oil and insert those expertly and turn around with those waters which are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers must be made pliable to get into the place where it is higher up; and make so that the entire fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is stuck before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then it is necessary to wrap a cloth around that; and then extract that until all is forgotten, and insert it either at the junction of the arm or in the armpit.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it is necessary to do so with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or there occurs contraction during delivery, or water is adjusted in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the bones spines and cut the head and drain the water, or that dissects that with an instrument which is called "alundat", whose form will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do so if the fetus is naturally large-headed: and then it is necessary to insert that with an algemate, or take that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is extracted and is contracted at the furrow, then it is necessary to cut through until the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor follows extraction, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the afterbirth is apostematic or is in a state of hydroptic swelling, then it is necessary to perforate that until the moisture which is in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is contracted in the belly and feet, then it is necessary to extract that with cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the belly and feet until the water that is in them flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are still and turn back to the head, then put your left hand into it; but if the mouth of the mother is swollen, then insert your hand into the pelvis, and search for that head, and pull it with those fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then put one finger, or two fingers, into it, and draw it along with them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is contracted by an apostematic swelling which comes to one, then it is necessary that no trouble be given about it; but rather administer an effusion of humid and fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And minister plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, it should be punctured: and water that we have said in the living fetus should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then insert it into pillows, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that no cause be left behind the secondine.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer the water that we have said for the cure of apostematic swellings which occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then administer purgative waters and give the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and then another pregnancy had begun, and the dead fetus was another.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	An accident occurred to me, about a long time ago, an apostematic swelling in my own umbilicus; and it inflated so that it became a large boil, and began to suppurate.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to the cure of it, and medicated it for a long time, but the wound did not consolidate.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to it some plaster of strong attraction, and extracted from it a bone, and after passing some days, extracted another bone; and I was too astonished, as in the belly there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I examined the wound, and extracted from it many bones, the woman existing in her own milks and dispositions, and already living in such a way for a long time, brought forth one small piece of flesh.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not find it strange, but rather because in that is science and aid to that which the physician-artificer administers with his hand for cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertex which is opened in the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which are equalized the freed limbs, to which equalization two vertebrae are joined at two extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	And however this vertebra must be more subtle than the strictor, and made of ebony or of boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the length of each stick is two fingers and a half; and in the middle place of two sticks are two adjustments of those same sticks which are already fixed, the length of which is one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened to receive them when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that one, more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Is made of sticks of ebony or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But in the extremity of it are two additional pieces like that, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then you must make the woman lift her feet off the bed and bend over, opening what is between her armpits.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then, with your hand on the instrument, as you would make forceps equalize according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother until she makes what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertex which was said by the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impeller, with which the fetus is impelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of misdirection, with which the large head is counteracted.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which has teeth on the extremity, like times, and some times is made long like forceps according to this form, like times, to which teeth are similar to teeth of a saw that is inserted and counteracted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of misdirection slightly:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of finger having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of fingers having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which are teeth of a saw with which the head of the fetus is counteracted.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spine having two extremities, with which the head is cut off.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two lateral spines:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of them are multiplied and prepared, then the artisans should be more skilled in their operation and have greater quantity of them.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments however small they may be, because the necessity for them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the secondine.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the secondine is retained in childbirth, then it is necessary to command the patient to retain her breath and then make that stornudate under certain conditions, and strengthen your hand over the mouth and nostrils of it, and if by this means it has been expelled, good is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a cloth and pierce it in the cover of a hole and pause in that herb which opens the mouth of the mother, like calament, ruda, anet, camomilla, Arabian squill, and cassia lignea, and saffron.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause that on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then pause a reed of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the evaporation comes to the concavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that stornudate as we have said, and the secondine is expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure does not work and the secondine remains, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of high-quality alta, and insert it into the concavity and seek out the secondine, and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little. But if it is annexed in the pelvis of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recounted, and when you have found the secondine, extract it gradually, following its natural course, so that the mother does not suffer from the strong attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before all, it is necessary to make it pliable at the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust it in the quantity of attraction, for it will obey and withdraw with adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is contracted, we have already recounted the cure with stornudation and medication of the cloth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recounted, then beware that you do not fetigues on it in iteration of abstraction, but rather make sure that what has issued from it to the mouth of the mother lies at the breast of the woman, and then christenize it with a gentle touch and tetrachloride; for that will cause it to be putrid after some days and dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it putrefies, it is elevated to bad authority at the head and stomach, and then leads the patient astray; and therefore it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered accordingly.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already been experimented with sub-fumigation of navel-worts and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menses and secondine:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Is made of veyre or eram.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And it is paused with the subtle extremity in the concavity and the broad extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is paused above the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold it until that sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure for the child's unbroken navel.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are thus and their navels are not pierced, which already have a subtle and opaque cicatrix.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then command the midwife to pierce it with her finger that cicatrix; and if not, then pierce it with a sharp awl, and be careful not to touch the skin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then pause on that lanolin infused in wine and oil; and then cure it with a gentle touch until it is clean.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may be obstructed, then pause in the hole a reed for many days, and stop when the child will desire to pass.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if an obstruction of the navel occurs due to consolidation of a wound or apostema; then command that this consolidation be inserted, and then cure it with the water we have said for the cure and with lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the cure for fistulas that remain after childbirth.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that remain in the aftermath of childbirth, which are lower and more swollen due to edema and grossness, and those that remain close to the navel or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a single fistula or multiple ones.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is ancient and flows with white watery humor or subtle putrefaction, and some times are penetrated by these fistulas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that are penetrated are known by what has issued from them through egression and flatulence; and some times the patient uses laxatives, and then a great deal is issued from these fistulas.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some times those fistulas penetrate into the space between the bladder and the urethra, and even into the flesh of the vulva; and some of these penetrate into the junction of the scrotum and into the notch of the clitoris.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And this is how a penetrating fistula that does not penetrate is known, namely by inserting the tip of your finger into the navel and then introducing a subtle probe made of eram or iron into the fistula when there is no tumorosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is a tumor in that fistula, then insert into it a subtle probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you don't feel it at all or if there is no discharge of anything from the hole, neither pus nor wind, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and be careful to proceed with the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the vulva, then the significance of it is issuing urine from that place and prohibiting it to that extent, so that the location where medicine is applied is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the junction of the scrotum or into the bone and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe passes through here if there is no tumor in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there will be a putrid discharge at all times; and that it will not be cured with medicine, nor consolidated with gentle touch.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of these is a great deal of labor and expertise of skilled physicians upon which we have fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I have recounted to you, and what has already been tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your knees over their back and lifts their legs up to yours, with the thighs inclined towards the belly of theirs, and then insert a probe made of lead or eram into the fistula if there is tumorosity in it, until you know the place where the probe goes in.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the navel, then command that you insert your finger into the navel.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already having passed through and penetrating, or if you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not trouble with it, as there is no healing in it, just as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some may say that it heals in certain people.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medication by which healing is expected in this case is that you ignite a subtle cauteri according to the size of the fistula, just as we have said, and then insert that ignited cauteri into the fistula until it reaches around the navel; and then repeat that process two or three times until you know that all those adjusted flesh folds that are like feathers on an owl's tail are now adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that with cloths wrapped in boiled linen until all those adjusted flesh folds are fully healed and consolidated; and then cure it with medicines generating and consolidating the flesh, and if it is healed, good is; and otherwise, never will be cured by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate into the navel which is in the navel, but rather passes through that soft flesh or cicatrix, and sometimes the fistula opens up on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and be in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the probe is inserted, and through the probe is liberated and cleansed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those flesh folds which are like the feathers of an owl and do not remain with any remaining cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is a flow of pus that comes between you and your operation when you are cleaning those flesh folds, then use the mill that is and take the least painful instrument, which is cauterization with fire or acute medicine, for cauterization with fire adjusts two good habits: it is adjustment of those adjusted flesh folds, and ablation of pus from excessive humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that with cloths wrapped in boiled linen or in threefold cloth until the location gets firm, and then command to cure the wound with gentle touch, generating and consolidating hard flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines in which there is astringency and excess; when the patient is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the pelvis of the navel and is elongated from its surface to the body, then insert your finger into the navel and investigate with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you feel the probe and it is gently on cicatrix or flesh, and is prepared for penetration, then there is no operation in this case except according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in this case one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you achieve the desired condition of the navel so that you can insert your fingers and carry out the cure provided; and do not proceed with any drying method so that you do not incise the skin containing the navel, and what happens is in accordance with the patient's own will; and then cure it as we have said, for it will soon be healed; or to lengthen it slightly and remove the pus that has accumulated by drying it out as much as possible over the navel, either with a probe or another sharp instrument of acute extremity, and then thoroughly cleanse those flesh folds which are in the section where you can see perforation; and then make every effort to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open on the part of the navel, it will be even easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the lateral part of the navel around the surface of the body with the skin and on the margin of the navel, then take a probe of perforated extremity, which is like an awl that prepares the holes according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that faithful envelope of 5 or those around them; and then insert the probe gently into the fistula until you achieve the desired condition.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrating in the margin of the navel, then you extract the probe from that hole just as you insert your finger into the navel; and extract the extremity of the probe and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and let it remain like that for a day or two, and when more you insert the probe into the flesh, strengthen it well so that those flesh folds are inserted which are between the two extremities of the probe and fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared, but not so that it is in the prepuce, because it is not for you to do this so as not to incise the skin; and then make it so until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the awl with which the fistula is pierced: its curvature is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not incise what is not necessary, just as sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the anus resembling charcoal or those which are like ripe grapes.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those that are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times and is one, and many, and outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, from which a yellowish water or a small amount of blood flows with the body continuingly, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is outside the anus is that you command the patient to settle down and express himself until the anus opens up and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take hold of them and suspend with the fingers or what you have as your fingernail, and then cut off those roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the fingers are not suitable for grasping those due to their moisture and softness, then take them with a rough cloth or a piece of leather or a woolen rag, and extract them with your fingers, and then cut off those roots and powder some powders nearby the incision, so that they stick to those places like cauterization; or cauterize those as is preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is a small amount of bitter substance, and wash it with that water that is in the navel and that will cause evacuation slightly when the patient presses.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of their being is slight, and it is that you take them with your fingernail or with an awl, and cut off those roots, and then cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that which you have incised, you must administer suturing of theirs according to this manner: take a needle wrapped and insert it into the awl and then extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make it penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the needle in the outermost part of the awl, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong stitches, and then remove the needle and awl.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one and not close it, for so that the superfluity of blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then pause over the anus with a cloth dipped in rose oil or cerote; and pause that over the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let it rest until it is closed; and when it is closed, cure those with gentle touch or another cure until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	The cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times accidents occur due to excessive division or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are so old and do not respond to that medicine, then it is necessary to reason with those at the point of awl or with your fingernail until they become moist and the discharge above is blocked from consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must grasp those with reason more violent than the first, until there is much blood and they are exfoliated; and then cure those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The cure of Almesmir is thus, it is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that Almesmir is thus, it is the key, and not if not noted according to the color of the skin resembling a cap of cloves, and it is made throughout the body and most especially in the parts below the feet and hands, and therefore it causes pain through those who do the amending.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to cut out that which is in the circle of the key, and to be held by forceps or awls, and to be eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is preceded in its own chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But verucca is a small, hard, round excrescence on the surface of the body, and many times it appears on the skin of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for it is that you stretch and cut out that excrescence, or that you strengthen it with a needle or thread until it closes.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And then they are eradicated, both ways and non-ways, with the instrument which you shall use.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But formica is a small, fatty or fistulous excrescence on the surface of the body growing downwards towards the groin, and when the skin finds that excrescence it seems to be bitten by a formic worm, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a reed pipe made from goose or from wolf's tail, and make it strong, and pause it on the formica until it contains the circle of the reed pipe in its parts; and then turn your hand with the reed pipe until you cut out what is in the circuit of the formica, and pause it in the groin of the flesh, and that eradicates the formica from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with an iron or steel reed according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Be the upper part of the reed pipe drawn out to subtlety, smooth (it is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that on the said point it takes hold and turns around itself.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the formica according to what is said before in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The form of the instruments that are administered to give ointment.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times it is made ointment of silver or lead or melted iron or hammered; and some times it is made with small and large instruments according to those which are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of small children is small; and the ointments of those whose buttocks are sore or painful, are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of great and little ointment:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the reed pipe above, in which the pouch is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the pouch is tied, as it sometimes happens.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it that is inserted into the anus should be smooth (it is not open) like a lion's back, going towards subtlety; and on one side there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and a little larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch should be made in such a way that medicines from the bladder of an animal or the wool of a sheep are placed inside it, and the root of it should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated by many small holes, as if it is being turned over; and the space between the holes should be the thickness of the same.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert the needle into those small holes, a strong and sharp needle made from the bone of ten or more needles, or one that is similar to them; and adjust the pouch (borsa) over it; and when the pouch is placed in it, be stretched at the top of the ointment between two distinct parts with strong constriction, and then cauterize each hole: But the quality of cauterizing is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back over the said spot, with their legs lifted up and their feet placed one on either side of the cauterized area; and then a cloth or a lansol should be placed over it, and a small amount of oil or albumen of hen or mucilage of fenugreek or something similar should be applied to the extremity of the cauterizer; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and the minister should take the pouch and squeeze out what is in the ointment with two hands and sometimes with vehemence until everything is evacuated from the container; and then remove the ointment and the patient should lift their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to evacuate immediately, let him do so as much as he can; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, it is more beneficial in its effect.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cauterize that in the illnesses of diarrhea and the evacuation of stool is slow, then you must iterate the cauterizer until he is cured.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then it should be the cauterizer of subtlety and lion, among the cauterizers which children are accustomed to.
De curacio de las plaguas.	The cure of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I already said in the division of the cure of plagues that this is suitable for the free, and I will say thus the cure of these with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that plagues are diversified according to this, in which the plagues are made and according to the place where one makes the plagues.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many times plagues are made are thus as follows: by bite of a snake, or incision with a sword or with a cotelet, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to these many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the plagues that are on the parts of the body are thus as follows: plague which afflicts the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the cure for some plagues, because it is rational and a rule for other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recollection of the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to snakebite or something similar, and you have already noticed that the patient has only just begun to swell and is now experiencing great pain and fears an abscess will form, then you should immediately take a lead bullet and apply it to the cephalic vein, and not delay; and remove the blood from the wound according to the quantity of the virtue of the medicine if there is no other cause prohibiting this, especially if the blood that has been drawn from the plague is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it should be the bleeding of the opposite side of the affected part; and beware the patient from taking in too much food, drink, and heavy nourishment.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any other cause prohibiting it, then let the nourishment be reduced and not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause over the plague, if it becomes an abscess, cut off in oil rosated or in wine that is stipticated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain that the abscess is not serious, then pause over the plague, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed the powder which I recommend to be applied little by little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then pause over another ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the plague is great or is due to incision with a sword and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted by poultices, then adjust those with suture according to what I recommend for the suture of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the plague has been discovered from bone and flesh, and there is no retention of it except a small suspensor, then cut into that and apply cure to the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in place of coding, and command the patient to eat foods in which greasiness is gross: heads and forms coit and similar things to theirs, until they are composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putridity in the coding and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut into all that putridity and take it away, and apply cure there.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not cut off by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that one that has not been cut off, then you should cut into it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if necessity demands that what we have said does not occur, then you should cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore you may powderize over those this powder, which will consolidate before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of dragon's blood one part, blood of dragon two parts, and unextinguished candle three parts; grind all together and crush well, and then fill the plague with it, and compress it with good constriction until it adheres well to that place, and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply the powder above as poultices and let it be, and do not remove it until it is thus as if there were an abscess, for then the medicine will not be absorbed into it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes it is done alone with this powder, when there is not enough of you in person and blood of dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this same operation is done in great plagues when it is necessary to pause over those and be stretched, and new plagues with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially in the summer, then it is not advisable to apply this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, by suspending over those certain ointments or powders made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until they give a purging; and then apply cure to those with another remedy until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens with a fracture in the bone and it is small, then you should extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And you should say the cure for fractures of the head in what is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plagues of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medicine between it and the plague of the head when simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or artery is affected, then if it is nerve, not in you but rather be avoided any cure that would cause vehement stipticitat, such as ziniar and zegi that is vetriol and similar to theirs which does not nourish the nerves and contracts them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause over the plague any cause that is all frozen, for the substance of the nerves is frozen and its continuation is to the brain, which is the most important of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is so with what is cured by light medicines, such as when it is washed with warm water and then infused in rose-colored or uncolored oil, and thucia when it is washed with warm water and the other parts are softened according to this manner, and ointments moist.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague is great, then you should administer sutures, or bind the lips of it, and apply cure to that with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the plague is deep or occurs at the lowest part of the poultice, then you should pierce it in the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the plague there is already incised artery and it has resulted in blood flow, then you should separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessity demands it to that.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the backbone or all have been incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should adjust the lips of the spine with sutures over the canal of the backbone and do not touch that; beforehand equalize that and reduce it to its natural figure, and apply strength to that with decent stretching, and leave that for some days; and apply cure to that with ointments in which there is stipticitat and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the plague has made a fracture in the bone, then you should pierce it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; and what is not properly set, leave that until the plague subsides, and be separate and the excrescence of it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powderize over that the powder which I recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the plague has made a fistula, then cure that with that of which remembrance will come to you in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the neck or similar when it is made between the shoulders and is made with a spaza (sword), a cotel (axe), a lansa (lance), or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a blow from a lance or axe, and the wound is deep, then you should consider more carefully if there is ventilation of the plague when the patient exhales; know that the plague is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the plague is recent with its own blood, then you should pause over it with powder in the first hour, and do not strengthen that which might cause the blood to be retained in the depth of it and return to the heart and afflict the patient; rather, pause over it with an attractive ointment, and remove it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then you should pause at the orifice of the plague and cut a small vein so that it sucks up the water that comes from the humidities; and make the patient sleep on top of the wound so that the water that is in it will be adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if from the plague three days or more have passed and there is no spasm nor tremor of heart nor constriction of breath, and sometimes other good dispositions are present in him, then know that the plague is saved; and therefore cure it with calmness and with another remedy until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of him is excluded, and already all time is open, then know that already a fistula has been made; cure therefore that according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is from incision of spaza or cotel, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with what precedes suturing, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if there is already a fracture in the bone, and you have incised pessas (fragments) from it, then you should torque the plague and pull them out to extract those pessas, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then you should leave them alone until the plague subsides, for the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other plagues that occur in other members, the treatment is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great some times yes the budel or nerve of the budel, for which there is made an introduction of them and the suture of them to be more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it seems that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introduction of them to their place soonest, for they open up and are engrossed, so that the instrument of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in that there is not difficult the reduction of the budel, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are necessary in sutures of other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures proper communicate with other plagues, but however are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And you recommend to you what is exposed and declared.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So I say that when the plague is small and there is some cause of the budel for it, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then this is in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the disruption just as we have said, or when the budel has come to be inflated due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, then it is necessary for you to scrape off that area with a sponge or damp cloth, or to apply water of the following mixture: cyperum, spic, and embrocation, and pour that over the budel until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some times I have seen in which there is constriction, and it is better that water alone does not resolve the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the budel with water in which there is high and bad humor, because of this it is alleviated the instrument of it with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of it is excused from this cure, then you should divide the disruption into small pieces with an instrument in which there are inserted bloody vessels.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is proper and not a section, and there is no occupation to cut too close to necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, see if its shape is like this:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one part of it is bent acute, and the other part not acute, and the extremity subtle, and not sharp like a spatula, but rather obtuse by a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the plague is amplified and outside the budel, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the form of it in its natural place, if possible on top of it, because it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back with their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the head lower than the feet.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your intention and consideration at this point so that the part where the plague is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this in great plagues and in middling plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, pause on what is to your liking, and make sure that the minister is between your most pious ones, who has the entire disruption in their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and make sure to uncover from this to that which will be some cause for another suturing.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the needle according to the size of the amplitude of the plague; and make sure to leave from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle one time, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the code, with the two extremities of the ciphac that is left over the code of the parts outside, until it penetrates that part; and you have already added the two extremities of the code and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And so strengthen with double faith in the circle of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and so add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and so leave the thickness of the finger and place another needle in that one, and so link it with a thread just like the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be middling between grossness and subtlety, because the subtle needles barely touch the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to manipulate in the code, and therefore it is necessary that they be middling in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary for the needle to be placed in two extremities of the code at once, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the wound does not become inflamed before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And it should not be prolonged in its suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And so insert the extremities of the needles in such a way that they do not disturb the patient's sleep; and pause over the suture, spreading out the powder all around, which has the extremities of the needles; and leave those alone until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of suture with needles in this manner is more suitable for small wounds, because it takes only one needle or two around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four extremities, of the code and two extremities of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which is faithful enveloped in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle to that middle part from which it began, so that the thread retracts into the most superior part of the wound, so that the suture is according to the suture of cloth with which the cloths are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the amount of thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture, I cured the wound that had been inflicted on a man in his belly, which was caused by a cotelet, and it was the disruption of the major wound of one palm, and it was situated around two palms of the belly button, and it was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it from there, since the belly had been for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured it and he is healthy; and so he lived for many years, and is converted to his usual dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle, it was so, because you did not cure him with an ointment, since there was no ointment nor any medicine found in that place, but instead, you paused over the wound twice a day and performed constant ablutions with water of honey until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But you will learn two species of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you begin with the suture of the code, and enter the needle from the outside to the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then, when the needle enters the code and meets with the lacertz (ligament) according to right and length throughout the entire body, and leaves the extremity of the ciphac (muscle) in which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside to the outside in the other extremity of the muscle.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then, when you have made the needle penetrate once, make it penetrate again in that same extremity of the muscle from the outside to the inside; and leave the extremity of the ciphac (muscle) that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside to the outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the needle penetrate to that point where your penetration makes it penetrate into the muscle in the extremity of the mirror which is on this side, until everything penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then, starting from this side of the code, and cutting that with the extremity that is of the ciphac on the other side, and extracting the needle from the code which it has penetrated, and then reducing it to that code and cosing the extremity of the ciphac that is on the other side with this same extremity of the mirror; and extracting that from the code which is of this part of lu.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make it so that there is one pass and another, and make it so that there is one pass and another again, until you close all this that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this suture method is that you close with sutura of pellicies with which you close the pels, in such a way that you close the ciphac once from the part of the extremity of the code, and then leave it open until you have completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second species of suture proper which is called Gualia by you, and this is according to the word of Lu and recommended for Lu, is that you close with the second semilitut with which all medicants close with it, in such a way that they add all part to their own corresponding part, as nature allows; and they apply the extremity of another from Lu and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of Lu, and this is done according to what you have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	So that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own pace from the outside, and make it penetrate into the inside in that same spot, and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and then turn back the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through two extremities of the ciphac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn back those stitches, and make each one penetrate from the inside to the outside through two extremities of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture which I mentioned earlier.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	And this is the word of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some may say that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so it is that you insert a thread into each one and begin with the introduction of needle from where it should be, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing method of those who sew the skin evenly.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly, the suture of Lu is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of wound healing is a judgment of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason is because when you successfully treat a recent wound with your own blood before it has time to alter that, and reduce the swelling and close the wound, and prepare it decently, then pause over that powder-like flesh.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that and consider the cases of those who are present before you, until they make a strong impression on your mind and cause the threads to break, and be consolidated ciphac and mirror; and then cure it in the same way as the healing of other wounds until it is well.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that for now, because it begins to generate a branch, coto veil, and exchange it two times a day, just as I have taught you, until it is well, since you do not need other medication in many situations when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may communicate with lesions in the main members, then it is necessary that you immerse a lion's fleece (lana leon) in high-quality olive oil or rose oil and pause it in the circuit of the places between the armpits and leave it as such.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own swelling (budels), since many times this happens, then pause over that with vinegar stiptic black tea, and especially if the abscess has penetrated into the cavity of the wound.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that the swelling that is in the large vessels (budel gros) is easier to heal than the one that is in the small vessels (budels subtils).
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the swelling that is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wound that breaks out in it; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is a web (tela), and you succeed in obtaining that which is recent, then reduce it according to your rectitude with which you reduce the swellings evenly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed through the space and is already green or black, then you should strengthen that with thread (fiel) over the location that is denigrated from it, in order that the flux of blood may come, since in the web are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then you should inscribe (inicieys) what is another ligament, and pause the two extremities of the thread while it is pending from the left side of the wound to the outside, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of the wound's discharge and emission of the branch of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the swelling (budel).
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the swelling (budel) and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in certain people, for this reason why you see someone who was once wounded in their own belly with a lance blow and had a wound on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and there was great movement and venting.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you should continue the treatment of it, whether or not it was contained in the healing of it, but rather subtly treat that until it is well and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you should see that the place is already consolidated, then take care of the patient who has suffered from the bad accident in their own belly; and do not neglect anyone because of this bad accident and remain in their natural habits eating and drinking, and also enter into a bath and exercise in their usual ways.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones will say that when a wound occurs in the swelling (budel), and it is small, then it must be tied according to this manner: and that you take threads of great caps; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one thread from those which have an open mouth over the two lips of the wound; therefore, when you put it on them and strengthen its mouth, cut off the head (abscindeys le cap de lu), for it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another thread (formigua) right next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with threads one after another according to the quantity of all the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce (reduzeys) that and close the wound; and those attached caps remain in the swelling until the swelling is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the swelling (budel) be bound with a fine thread (fiel subtil) made from the swelling of an animal attached to it, since it is more in the shape of an awl; and it is that you take the end of these threads of the swelling, and it is quite bare, and then tie the end of it with another thread, enveloped, and then insert that thread into the awls and close it with the swelling, and reduce the swelling in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suture with threads is not just according to one way, but rather through faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle swellings (budels), for then it is not just a matter of subtlety (subtiliacio), but rather a complete healing of all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The chapter on the cure of abscesses (zuchem) and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound (plaguada) and abscess (apostema) when it becomes old and worn out, and is made into an ulcer (ulcus), and is not consolidated and keeps getting worse over time, and is not cut off, wherever it may be, universally is called a fistula (fistula) and we call it azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is a hardened, durable, and white nodulation (nodacio feutrada) without pain (e no es dolor), which is conquered (conquavitat) in the same way that a penance (pena de ausel) is conquered; and for this reason it is called alcus rizatz, id est penalty.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people (alcus homes), it is watery (humida), which drips (geta brac); and the moisture (fort leu la humiditat) is drained off in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And in some cases (alcunas veguadas), this moisture (humiditat) is abundant (mota), and is little (pauca), and is thick (grossa), and is fine (subtil).
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division (la divisio), now as you ask about the wounds (las plaguas), that any ulcer that is not healed or does not become a wound on bare flesh (ni no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn) is caused by one of these reasons: among which is either because there is too little blood in the body; or because it is due to malice towards the patient; or because there is hard skin between the ulcer and the lips that prevents new tissue from forming; or because it is a very deep wound; or because the pus inside the wound is putrid and the material being sent to the wound is of poor quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in healing the wound; or when corruption creeps into the region, and there is pestilence; or because the region has its own property, such as Saragossa, where digestion of diseases is difficult and recovery from abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have already shown all those causes (totas aquellas causas) and their signs (senhals), as well as the cure for them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary that you know how to cure a fistula, which is made by surgical operation with my hands.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body (totz les membres del cos); for some are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or to the ribs, or to the swelling (budel), or to the bladder, or to any of the costs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the joints composed of bone and cartilage in such a way that they are close to the main member and resemble.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that type of fistula which is according to this manner (es segon aquesta manieyra) is one of the difficult-to-cure diseases (malautias de dificil sanacio), and does not receive treatment or care, and its occupation (occupacio) with ignorance (trebalh e ignorancia).
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if some of these fistulas are so deep that they do not reach the points I have mentioned, and you wait and hope for their cure, and wish to gain understanding of them, then you take a tentative approach with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows the natural course (va segon rectetut), you will examine it with the aid of your own judgment.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted (tortuissitat), then you investigate it with a subtle lead (plom subtil) because lead with the lightness of its own body (am la levitat del sieu cors) is relieved and curved in such a way that it can straighten out the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is full of many horrific things (havent motz horrificis), it is not possible for you to signify anything over it with a tentative approach.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then you must cleanse the orifice with its own orifices, because the moisture that you use to cleanse it flows into other orifices and comes out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And approach this inquiry with exquisite precision, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves (os o nervi) here, and whether the conquest of the fistula is long-standing (longinqua) or recent (propdana), or whether it is a fistula with many orifices (motz orrificis) and is situated above all with the sum of your strength, with your introspection, with which you understand the illness (enterroguacio), and the invention of pain as a result of your compression with the hand on the location, and similar signs and causes that occur to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all those causes (totas aquellas causas) and have arrived at the truth (stacio veraya), then you will go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether this fistula is an apparent one near the surface or in a place of salt, distant from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the locations which I mention to you and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then you will cut open the fistula according to what is said before in the narration of it, and you will take out what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has been born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the bone and similar things, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of long-standing depth and follows the natural course (es segon rectetut), then you must incise it in the preon as far as it is possible for you to reach, and appropriate mondify all its corrupted flesh; and appropriate administer some enveloped medicines, and introduce those into the conquest of the fistula which has been comprehended by iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And make this with that some times until the acute medicine corrodes all that remains in the conquest of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore that with the substances which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed through this, then you must cauterize that according to what we have recounted.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone (os) and it is necessary for you to be certain about this, then you must inquire into that and cut open that according to what we have recounted, unless you prohibit some cause from a vein or nerve or main member in the way that we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is revealed to you and it contains some corruption and blackness (negror), then you must remove that entire corruption and blackness, and appropriate cure that with what is in that place until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and remains black like that, then you must know that you have not achieved the total eradication of corruption; and therefore, you will discover anew over it with exquisite precision and make the reason for it and the purification of it with the utmost strength and power, and appropriate restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore, if it is healed, then good; and otherwise, you must know that the corruption is in the deep-seated parts of the body (profunditat longinqua del cors), which has not been achieved, and accordingly, there is nothing for you to do but leave it as it is.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, it is to your advantage to attract that, then you must attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones (motz osses), then you must make the extraction of all those in an exquisite manner, and leave no cause behind with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of humidity arises in your favor, and there is no fear or error in them, then you must inscribe those limbs or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if your preparation is not suitable for removing the bones of that hour (ostar les osses de la tua hora), then you must pause over this wound (plagua aquo) which will render that wound (plagua aquela) into a condition where it can be surrounded by those bones (osses de carns e de liamentz), and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have inscribed in your operation (seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio) must be constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	They had said, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in soporific oil, or the wound submerged in Egyptian anguish, or in any of the green herbs, for when those limbs will be decomposed, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and that attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a great bone, like the bone of camba or coyssa or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface, then you must remove that with a razor only as far back as necessary until the blackness and corruption are removed, and appropriate restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which is corrupted from it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone (la medulla del os), then you must necessarily close that and entirely inscribe it within the location where the corruption has taken place, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you seek out a man in his couch (en la sua coyssa) so that he may pause and give you an example and assistance over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Seek out a young man of about thirty years old, to whom it happens that he has pain in his side (cueyssa), and the parts dedintz are mauled (mauguda) is on the material dedintz within the body (entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa), and it is material of abscess with great abscess, and there is no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was extended with that because of the mistake of the doctors until the abscess was ruptured, and a great many materials (materias) flowed out, and his cure was almost paused, until the camba became fistulated, and made its way through the orifices (motz orrificis) which were all pouring forth pus and fluids from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then I was summoned to the many doctors for about two years, and they did not know in those what they knew in the art (ma en la art), until you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the camba of that and the materials that were flowing from it through great holes (orrificis) for a large body (gran cors); and already the body of that man was totally stabilized, and the color of it was yellowish (citrina).
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced the probe into one of those orifices and guided it to the bone (os).
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the orifices and found that those which were coming from the bone (os) were coming from all parts of the camba.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and inscribed over one of those orifices until I uncovered a part of the bone (os), and I found that part corrupted, and it was already rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the camba had penetrated into the medulla.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I took out what had been discovered and prepared from the bone (os) that was uncovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone (os) but that corruption which abscessed and was removed, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused to restore the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and uncovered over the bone (os) secondarily on the first discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed what appeared to be from that corruption, and then I was forced to perform the cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another way and did not cease to inscribe the small bone (os petit) little by little particularly, and forced the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I inscribed around a palm's width from it, and that extracted with its own medulla, and I re-established it with medicines, and it consolidated gradually and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of the abscess and its section, but rather due to the disposition of the flesh (freulesa) of the patient and the scarcity of tolerance of the patient and their fear of death, for the patient is subject to constant hours of superfluous evacuation by bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore the healing is complete, and nothing remains in place of hard bone (os carn dura); and it has been done well the disposition of him in his own body and he has returned to his virtue; and it has been converted into its own dispositions and he does not make contrary movements in ambulation nor any harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in the body already traumatized, you must cut it according to this manner: take a ligament and stretch that in the extremity of that prominent bone; and command someone to extend that over there; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is left on the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you can pull the flesh to the parts left, and then uncover the flesh over the place where you want to sew so that the seam does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause at the fist or table left on the bone decently, for when you do this it is not prohibited to cut the seam that does not cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the suturing be done slowly and carefully over the corrupted area, little by little, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear on its surface to the sense, then you must make another incision in a different way.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is better to remove one part and continue with the other; and if the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you must uncover all parts completely; and then pause at the fist left there, and then sew that from the first part where the corruption is into the continuation of the suturing of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the suturing be done according to the location of the corruption, a little at a time, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the junction, cut out that corrupted junction and sew the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but rather by art.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire into the corruption and how it appears to you, and then cut out that which is corrupted, and shape it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and by all means rectify it to your own being, unless it contradicts your veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you must know what instruments and how to use the scissors to cut these bones are most suitable according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, size, subtlety, grandeur, smallness, hardness, and rarity; so that it is necessary for you to prepare all kinds of surgical instruments that are convenient for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you must know that this operation requires of you over the species of the instrument which you need; when you are great in study and long and profound knowledge of the ways of this art, and witness to the ways of diseases, for then already you have them by yourself that is convenient to all maladies.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should also note at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with, as simple ones, with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	I think I see where this is going!
Forma de autra serra:	Another one!
Forma de autra serra:	The same shape as before?
Forma de autra serra gran:	A larger shape!
Forma de ray:	A new shape!
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Now we're talking about the details of this rasp!
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	Now we're talking about how to use this rasp!
Forma de razori major dels autres:	A new shape!
Forma de razori menor:	Another shape!
Forma de razori lat:	A new shape!
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	A new shape!
Forma de lu:	A new shape!
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	A new shape!
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another shape!
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Another shape!
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	A unique shape!
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	A new shape!
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another shape!
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Another shape!
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Another shape!
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The shape of the rasp gets even more detailed!
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	The final piece of the puzzle!
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The grand finale!
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The conclusion!
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The final sentence!
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	The final sentence!
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	The final sentence!
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	The final sentence!
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	The final sentence!
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	The final sentence!
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	The final sentence!
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	The final sentence!
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	The final sentence!
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	The final sentence!
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The final sentence!
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	The final sentence!
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	The final sentence!
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	The final sentence!
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	The final sentence!
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	The final sentence!
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	The final sentence!
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	The final sentence!
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	The final sentence!
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	The final sentence!
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	The final sentence!
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	The final section!
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	The final section!
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	The final sentence!
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The final sentence!
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	The final sentence!
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	The final sentence!
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	The final sentence!
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	The final sentence!
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	The final sentence!
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	The final sentence!
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	The final sentence!
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	The final sentence!
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	The final sentence!
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	The final sentence!
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	The final sentence!
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	The final sentence!
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	The final sentence!
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The final sentence!
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The final sentence!
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	The final sentence!
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	The final sentence!
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	The final sentence!
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	The final sentence!
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	The final sentence!
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The final sentence!
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	The final sentence!
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	The final sentence!
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	The final sentence!
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	The title of the next chapter!
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The first paragraph of the new chapter!
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	The next paragraph!
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	The next paragraph!
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	The next paragraph!
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final paragraph!
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	The final sentence!
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	It seems like we've reached the end of the text!
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	The final sentence!
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The final sentence!
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	The final sentence!
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	The final sentence!
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The final sentence!
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	The final sentence!
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	The final sentence!
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	It looks like we've hit a snag!
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	It seems like we've reached a rather interesting and detailed passage about varicose veins!
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	The final sentence!
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The final passage!
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The final passage!
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	The final sentence!
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	The final sentence!
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The final passage!
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	The final sentence!
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	The final sentence!
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	The final sentence!
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	The final sentence!
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	The final sentence!
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	The final sentence!
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	The final sentence!
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	The final sentence!
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	The final sentence!
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	The final sentence!
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	The final sentence!
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
Forma de unci orp:	It looks like we've reached the final section of the text!
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	The final details!
De extraccio venae cruris.	The final topic!
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	The final passage!
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	The final sentence!
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The final sentence!
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The final passage!
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears on him, you must wrap around it a lead weight of which the weight is one third of an ounce, and tie it off with a string and leave the weight suspended from his hip.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	The final sentence!
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	The final sentence!
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	The final sentence!
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	The final sentence!
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	The final sentence!
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	The final sentence!
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	The final sentence!
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	The final sentence!
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	The final sentence!
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The final sentence!
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	The final sentence!
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	The final sentence!
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	The final sentence!
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	The final sentence!
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	The final sentence!
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	The final sentence!
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	The final sentence!
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	The final sentence!
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	The final sentence!
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	The final sentence!
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	The final sentence!
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	The final sentence!
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	The final sentence!
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	The final sentence!
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	The final sentence!
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	The final sentence!
De extraccio de sagetas.	The final sentence!
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	The final sentence!
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	The final sentence!
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	The final sentence!
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The final sentence!
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The final sentence!
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	The final sentence!
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	The final sentence!
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	The final sentence!
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	The final sentence!
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The final sentence!
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	The final sentence!
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The final sentence!
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	The final sentence!
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The final sentence!
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	The final sentence!
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	The final sentence!
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	The final sentence!
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	The final sentence!
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	The final sentence!
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	The final sentence!
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	The final sentence!
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	The final sentence!
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	The final sentence!
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	The final sentence!
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	The final sentence!
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	The final sentence!
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	The final sentence!
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The final sentence!
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	The final sentence!
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The final sentence!
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	The final sentence!
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	The final sentence!
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	The final sentence!
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	The final sentence!
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	The final sentence!
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	The final sentence!
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	The final sentence!
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	The final sentence!
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	The final sentence!
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	The final sentence!
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	The final sentence!
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	The final sentence!
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	The final sentence!
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	The final sentence!
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	The final sentence!
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	The final sentence!
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	The final sentence!
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	The final sentence!
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	The final sentence!
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	The final sentence!
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	The final sentence!
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	The final sentence!
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	The final sentence!
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The final sentence!
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	It seems like we have reached the end of the text!
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The final sentence!
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	The final sentence!
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The final sentence!
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The final sentence!
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	The final sentence!
De fleubotomia de las venas.	It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The final sentence! The final sentence! The final sentence!
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The final sentence! The final sentence!
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	The final sentence!
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The final sentence!
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	The final sentence!
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	The final sentence!
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	The final sentence!
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	The final sentence!
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	The final sentence!
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The final sentence!
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	The final sentence!
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	The final sentence!
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	The final sentence!
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The final sentence!
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	The final sentence!
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	The final sentence!
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The final sentence!
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	The final sentence!
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	The final sentence!
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The final sentence!
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	The final sentence!
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The final sentence!
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	The final sentence!
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	The final sentence!
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The final sentence!
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	The final sentence!
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	The final sentence!
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	The final sentence!
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The final sentence!
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	The final sentence!
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The final sentence!
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	The final sentence!
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	It looks like we've reached the final sentence!
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The final sentence!
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	It looks like we've reached the final sentence!
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	The final sentence!
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The final sentence!
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	The final sentence!
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	The final sentence!
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	The final sentence!
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	The final sentence!
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	The final sentence!
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	The final sentence!
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The final sentence!
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The final sentence!
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	The final sentence!
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The final sentence!
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	The final sentence!
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	The final sentence!
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	The final sentence!
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The final sentence!
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The final sentence!
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	The final sentence!
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The final sentence!
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	The final sentence!
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	The final sentence!
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	The final sentence!
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	The final sentence!
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	The final sentence!
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	The final sentence!
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	The final sentence!
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	The final sentence!
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	The final sentence!
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	The final sentence!
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	The final sentence!
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The final sentence!
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	The final sentence!
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	The final sentence!
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	The final sentence!
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	The final sentence!
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	The final sentence!
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	The final sentence!
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	The final sentence!
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	The final sentence!
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	The final sentence!
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	The final sentence!
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	The final sentence!
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The final sentence!
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	The final sentence!
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	The final sentence!
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	The final sentence!
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	The final sentence!
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	The final sentence!
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The final sentence!
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	The final sentence!
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	The final sentence!
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	The final sentence!
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	The final sentence!
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	The final sentence!
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	The final sentence!
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	The final sentence!
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	The final sentence!
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	The final sentence!
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	The final sentence!
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	The final sentence!
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	The final sentence!
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	The final sentence!
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The final sentence!
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	The final sentence!
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	The final sentence!
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	The final sentence!
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	The final sentence!
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The final sentence!
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The final sentence!
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	The final sentence!
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	The final sentence!
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	The final sentence!
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The final sentence!
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	The final sentence!
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The final sentence!
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	The final sentence!
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	The final sentence!
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	The final sentence!
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	The final sentence!
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	The final sentence!
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	The final sentence!
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The final sentence!
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	The final sentence!
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	The final sentence!
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	The final sentence!
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	The final sentence!
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The final sentence!
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The final sentence!
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	The final sentence!
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The final list of locations!
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	The final statement!
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	The final sentence!
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The final passage!
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	The final instruction!
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The final note on ventosities!
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	The final location!
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	The final warning!
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	The final caution!
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	The final instruction!
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The final reference!
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	The final caution!
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The final reference!
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	The final instruction!
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The final reference!
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The final note!
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The final reference!
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	The final instruction!
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	The final reference!
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	The final instruction!
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The final reference!
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	The final sentence!
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	The final note!
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The final instruction!
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	The final note!
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	The final instruction!
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	The final note!
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	The final instruction!
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	The final note!
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	The final note!
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	The final note!
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	The final sentence!
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	The final instruction!
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The final note!
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	The final note!
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	The final note!
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	The final note!
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	The final note!
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	The final note!
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The final instruction!
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	The final question!
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	The final instruction!
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	The final instruction!
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	The final instruction!
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	The final instruction!
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	The final instruction!
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The final note!
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	The final note!
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	The final note!
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	The final note!
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	The final note!
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	The final note!
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The final note!
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The final note!
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	The final note!
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	The final note!
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	The final note!
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The final note!
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The final note!
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	The final note!
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	The final note!
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	The final note!
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	The final note!
Capitol .xcvii.	The final chapter!
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	The final note!
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The final note!
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	The final note!
E cum son umplidas e caso.	The final note!
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	The final note!
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	The final note!
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	The final note!
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	The final note!
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	The final note!
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	The final note!
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	The final note!
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	The final note!
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	The final note!
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	The final note!
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	The final note!
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	The final note!
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	The final note!
Capitol primier.	The beginning!
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The first chapter!
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	The opening remarks!
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	The author's advice!
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	The author's dietary advice!
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	The author's final advice!
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	The author's final words on fracture treatment!
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	The author's final warning!
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	The author's final observation!
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The author's final reflection!
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	The author's final recommendation!
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The final classification!
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The final classification!
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	The final statement!
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The final note!
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The final classification!
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The final note!
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	The final sign!
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The final description!
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	The final conclusion!
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	The final warning!
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The final wisdom!
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	The final guidance!
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The final insight!
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	The final conclusion!
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	The final recommendation!
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	The final guidance!
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	The final warning!
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	The final advice!
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	The final warning!
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The final guidance!
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The final recommendation!
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	The final detail!
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	The final detail!
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	The final instruction!
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	The final reminder!
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	The final instruction!
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	The final step!
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The final caution!
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	The final instructions!
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The final description!
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	The final instructions!
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The final warning!
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	The final caution!
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	The final instruction!
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	The final remark!
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	The final warning!
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	The final conclusion!
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The final recipe!
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	The final touch!
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for applying an ointment to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: recipe of assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the root of salvaged milgraner, one third of an ounce each; of myrrh and aloes, one third of an ounce each; of alochil, twenty times the weight of a drachma; all are crushed and sifted and mixed with water or albumen of egg if the patient's complexion is scorched; and then use this ointment, which has good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives strength to men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for applying an ointment that gives strength to fractures and torsion: recipe of myrrh and white alta one third of an ounce each; of myrrh and aloes one third of an ounce each; of acacia three ounces; of Armenian balm twenty times the weight of a drachma.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The final instructions!
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	The final recipe!
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	The final warning!
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another recipe for a plaster that can restore broken bones!
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Another abbreviated method for administering a plaster to restore broken bones and resolve abscesses! The final instructions!
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	The final caution!
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plastering that is even stronger in its resolution than the first one, when there is a persistent abscess and needs restoration of the member: recipe of roots of aloes and seeds of lily, and of balm, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, all mixed together with Ana's partition and equalized; all are sifted and mixed with water of sage or with boiled water or with wine, according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	The final caution!
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	The final recommendation!
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Another recipe for a plaster that relieves injury and pain!
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The final caution!
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	The final warning!
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	The final instructions!
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final words of wisdom!
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	The final repetition!
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	The final instructions! The final guidance!
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	The final adjustment!
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	The final tip!
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	The final critique!
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	The final reflection!
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	The second chapter!
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The different types of fractures!
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The different causes and appearances of fractures!
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	The different types of fractures!
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	The mysterious "capillary fracture"!
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	The mysterious "intrusion fracture"!
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	The mysterious "intrusion fracture" continues!
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	The final conclusion!
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	The final farewell!
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	The final observation!
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The final observation about the "capillary fracture"!
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	The final consideration!
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	The final conclusion!
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The final cause!
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	The final consideration!
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	The final recommendation!
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	The final guidance!
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	The final guidance on treating the plague!
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	The final conclusion!
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first method of operation!
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	The first method of operation continues!
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	The variety of inserters!
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	The importance of careful percussion!
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	The importance of careful penetration!
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	The limitations of the taravels!
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	The importance of having a variety of taravels!
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	The three species of taravels!
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	The importance of subtle incision!
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	The importance of caution when using inserters!
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	The importance of precision when extracting the bone!
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	The importance of carefully extracting small and delicate bones!
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The second method of operation!
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The description of the lenticular and acute parts!
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	The importance of careful percussion!
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	The release of the bone from the surrounding tissue!
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	The importance of carefully smoothing out the bone surface!
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	The importance of administering the bone in a gradual and controlled manner!
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	The importance of administering care in a subtle and precise manner!
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	The importance of thorough study in the field of medicine!
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	The conclusion of the text!
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	The application of dressings and liniments!
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	The application of medicine to promote healing!
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	The application of powdered medicine to the wound!
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	The importance of cleanliness and caution in wound care!
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	The consequences of poor wound care!
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	The application of a mixture of honey and rose oil to the wound! The application of a dressing and the administration of medicinal substances!
Capitol .iii.	The next chapter!
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	A new topic!
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	The anatomy of the nose!
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	A procedure for treating a broken nose!
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	A warning about the importance of caution!
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	A specific technique for treating a fracture in the upper part of the nose!
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	A technique for treating a fracture that occurs in two parts!
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	A recommendation for when to re-apply the treatment!
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	A description of a treatment for nasal fractures!
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	A description of the treatment process!
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	A description of a treatment for nasal fractures!
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	A note on flexibility in medical treatment!
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	A description of a treatment for a different type of wound!
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	A description of a treatment for a different type of wound!
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	A description of the treatment for nasal fractures!
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	A description of the treatment for a wound behind the nose!
Capitol .iiii.	It seems that we have reached the end of the text! Well done on making it through the entire passage!
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	It seems that we have a new topic!
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	A description of the fracture of the jawbone!
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	A description of the treatment for a fractured jawbone!
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	A description of the treatment for a severely fractured jawbone!
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	A description of the treatment for dental disrupcion and fractured jawbone!
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	A description of the treatment for dental disrupcion and fractured jawbone!
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	A description of the treatment for dental disrupcion and fractured jawbone!
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	A conclusion to the treatment for dental disrupcion and fractured jawbone!
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	A description of the treatment for a secondary infection!
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	A description of the treatment for a fractured jawbone with an accompanying wound!
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	A description of the treatment for a severely infected wound!
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	A description of the treatment for a wound!
Capitol .v.	It seems that we have reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	A new topic!
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	A description of a fractured collarbone!
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	A description of the three types of collarbone fractures!
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone with an accompanying wound!
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	A description of the surgical procedure for a fractured collarbone!
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	A description of the shape and size of the instrument!
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	A description of the instrument's length!
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	A description of the wound closure technique!
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	A description of the wound dressing technique!
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	A description of a treatment for severe infection!
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	A description of the treatment for a fractured collarbone!
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	A description of the treatment for a fractured collarbone!
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	A description of the treatment for a fractured collarbone!
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	A description of the treatment for a fractured collarbone!
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	A description of the treatment for a fractured collarbone!
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	A description of the recovery time for a fractured collarbone!
Capitol .vi.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	We're now in the section titled "De restauracio de fractura de la spalla" which translates to "On the Restoration of Fracture of the Shoulder".
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A fascinating passage!
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	A crucial passage!
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	A detailed description of the treatment process!
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	A crucial step in the treatment process!
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	A crucial step in the treatment process!
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	A crucial step in the treatment process!
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	The final step!
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The final outcome!
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	The final step!
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	The final instructions!
Capitol .vii.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	A new section!
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	A description of foot fractures!
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	A vivid description of the consequences of a foot fracture!
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration process!
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	The application of plaster and bandages!
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	The correction of the wrapping!
Capitol .viii.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	A new section!
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Insight into rib fractures!
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The importance of knowing one's own body!
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The goal of restoration!
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	The consequences of untreated rib fractures!
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The use of ancient knowledge!
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	The use of natural remedies to treat the patient!
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	The importance of caution and careful planning!
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	The use of reason and caution in medical decision-making!
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	The use of natural remedies and careful treatment!
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	The importance of careful consideration and caution!
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	The importance of proper wound closure!
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	The use of poultices to treat apostema!
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	The importance of proper positioning!
Capitol .ix.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Restoring fractures of the spine and neck!
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	The importance of careful observation!
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	The importance of careful consideration and observation!
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	The signs of healing!
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	The importance of considering the patient's overall condition!
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	The signs of impending doom!
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	The importance of identifying the underlying cause!
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment for the patient involves soothing the apostema with a warm oil compress!
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	The importance of rest and relaxation in the recovery process!
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	The importance of proper wound care and closure!
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	The importance of proper bone alignment and stabilization!
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	The importance of proper wound care and healing!
Capitol .x.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la ancha.	The importance of restoring the wide opening!
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The consequences of broken bones in the wide opening!
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The process of restoration!
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	The importance of proper alignment and adjustment!
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	The importance of preparation and gentle treatment!
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	The application of the splint!
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The importance of proper alignment and relaxation!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	The importance of treating the underlying cause!
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	The importance of treating the underlying cause!
Capitol .xi.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	The importance of restoring the fractured joint!
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The definition of the adjutori!
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	The process of restoring the fractured adjutori!
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The placement of the wooden plate!
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The patient's positioning and arm placement!
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	The importance of proper suspension and alignment!
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The alternative method of treatment!
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	The importance of additional support!
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	The importance of proper placement!
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	The importance of proper placement at the shoulder blade!
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	The importance of gentle and careful application!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	The treatment of a serious infection!
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of strengthening the area!
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	The importance of proper positioning!
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	The use of stars!
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	The use of stars to guide treatment!
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	The importance of applying strength!
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The importance of a tight dressing!
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The relationship between dressing length and fracture severity!
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	The importance of restoring the limb to its natural position!
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	The importance of avoiding infection!
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	The importance of proper ligament placement and avoidance of complications!
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	The importance of patient confidence in the healing process!
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The importance of proper positioning during sleep!
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	The importance of maintaining proper dressing and ligature during the healing process!
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	The importance of adjusting diet according to the patient's condition!
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The importance of gradually increasing strength and mobility!
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	The importance of patience when dealing with slow-healing fractures!
Capitol .xii.	The 12th chapter!
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	The restoration of fractured arms!
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The anatomy of the arm!
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The types of fractures in the arm!
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The treatment of wrist fractures!
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	The challenges of treating elbow fractures!
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	The severity of double fractures!
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	The importance of prompt treatment for wrist fractures!
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	The importance of more extensive treatment for elbow fractures!
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	The importance of strong immobilization for double forearm fractures!
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	The importance of proper positioning and immobilization for hand injuries!
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	The importance of a supportive surface for the patient's comfort!
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The importance of proper positioning and alignment for the patient's comfort!
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	The importance of proper alignment and correction for the patient's recovery!
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	The importance of thorough examination and correction for complex bone fractures!
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	The importance of addressing separate irregularities and distortions in bone fractures!
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	The importance of taking care of wounds and injuries!
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	The importance of applying dressings and treatments to promote healing!
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The importance of understanding the names and locations of the bones in the arm!
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	The importance of applying pressure and stability to the fracture site!
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The importance of using soft and moist dressings for fractures!
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	The importance of monitoring progress and adjusting treatment!
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	The importance of addressing complications and relieving pressure!
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	The importance of allowing the limb to rest and re-stabilizing!
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	The importance of ensuring proper alignment and correction!
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	The importance of ensuring proper nutrition and circulation!
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	The importance of patience and not rushing the healing process!
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	The importance of gentle exercise and rest for the patient!
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	The importance of understanding the natural healing process!
Capitol .xiii.	Let's begin translating Chapter 13!
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	The title of Chapter 13 is:
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	The author is saying:
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	The author is saying:
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The author is saying:
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	The author is saying:
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	The author is saying:
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The author is saying:
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	The author is saying:
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	The author is saying:
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	The author is saying:
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	The author is saying:
Capitol .xiv.	Let's begin translating Chapter 14!
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	The title of Chapter 14 is:
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The author is saying:
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The author is saying:
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The author is saying:
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	The author is saying:
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	The author is saying:
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The author is saying:
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	The author is saying:
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The author is saying:
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	The author is saying:
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	The author is saying:
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	The author is saying:
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	The author is saying:
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	The author is saying:
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	The author is saying:
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	The author is saying:
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	The author is saying:
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	The author is saying:
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	The author is saying:
Capitol .xv.	It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter 14! Would you like me to translate the next chapter (Capitol .xv.)?
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	A new chapter!
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	The author is saying:
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	The author is saying:
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The author is saying:
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	The author is saying:
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	The author is saying:
Capitol .xvi.	A new chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	A new chapter!
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	The author is saying:
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	The author is saying:
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	The author is saying:
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	The author is saying:
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	The author is saying:
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	The author is saying:
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	The author is saying:
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	The author is saying:
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	The author is saying:
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	The author is saying:
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	The author is saying:
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	The author is saying:
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	The author is saying:
Capitol .xvii.	A new chapter!
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	A new topic!
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The author is saying:
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	The author is saying:
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	The author is saying:
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	The author is saying:
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	The author is saying:
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	The author is saying:
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	The author is saying:
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	The author is saying:
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	The author is saying:
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	The author is saying:
Capitol .xviii.	A new chapter!
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	A new topic!
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	The author is saying:
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The author is saying:
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	The author is saying:
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	The author is saying:
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	The author is saying:
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	The author is saying:
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	The author is saying:
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	The author is saying:
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	The author is saying:
Capitol .xix.	A new chapter!
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	The title of Chapter 19 is:
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	The author is saying:
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	The author is saying:
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	The author is saying:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	The author is saying:
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	The author is saying:
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	The author is saying:
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	The author is saying:
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	The author is saying:
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	The author is saying:
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	The author is saying:
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	The author is saying:
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	The author is saying:
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	The author is saying:
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	The author is saying:
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	The author is saying:
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The author is saying:
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	The author is saying:
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	The author is saying:
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	The author is saying:
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	The author is saying:
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	The author is saying:
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	The author is saying:
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	The author is saying:
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	The author is saying:
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	The author is saying:
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	The author is saying: The author is saying:
Capitol .xx.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The ".xx." indicates that this is Chapter 20 (Capitol .xx.). Well done on making it through all the Latin text!
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The title of Chapter 20 is:
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	The text is saying:
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	The text is saying:
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	The text is saying:
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The text is saying:
Capitol .xxi.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	The title of Chapter 21 is:
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	The text is saying:
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The text is saying:
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	The text is saying:
Capitol .xxii.	We've reached the end of the text!
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The title of Chapter 22 is:
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	The text is saying:
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	The text is saying:
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	The text is saying:
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	The text is saying:
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	The text is saying:
Capitol .xxiii.	We've reached the end of the text!
De sermo en dislocacio.	The title of Chapter 23 is:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	The text is saying:
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	The text is saying:
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	The text is saying:
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	The text is saying:
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	The text is saying:
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	The text is saying:
Capitol .xxiiii.	We've reached the end of the text!
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	The title of Chapter 24 is:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The text is saying:
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	The text is saying:
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	The text is saying:
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The text is saying:
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	The text is saying:
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	The text is saying:
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	The text is saying:
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	The text is saying:
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	The text is saying:
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	The text is saying:
Capitol .xxv.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The title of Chapter 25 is:
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The text is saying:
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The text is saying:
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	The text is saying:
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	The text is saying:
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The text is saying:
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	The text is saying:
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	The text is saying:
Capitol .xxvi.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	The title of Chapter 26 is:
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	The text is saying:
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The text is saying:
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The text is saying:
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	The text is saying:
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	The text is saying:
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The text is saying:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	The text is saying:
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	The text is saying:
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The text is saying:
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	The text is saying:
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The text is saying:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	The text is saying:
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	The text is saying:
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The text is saying:
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	The text is saying:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	The text is saying:
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	The text is saying:
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	The text is saying:
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	The text is saying:
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	The text is saying:
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The text is saying:
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	The text is saying:
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	The text is saying:
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The text is saying:
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The text is saying:
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	The text is saying:
Capitol .xxvii.	It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter XXVII!
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	It looks like we're starting a new chapter!
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	It seems we're diving into the complexities of the coccyx (coyde) dislocation!
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	It seems we're discussing the importance of prompt reduction and treatment in cases of coccyx (coyde) dislocation!
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	It seems we're getting into the nitty-gritty of the reduction process!
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	It seems we're discussing the specifics of reducing a coccyx (coyde) dislocation in the anterior (front) part!
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	It seems we're discussing what to do when the reduction process doesn't work!
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	It seems we're discussing the importance of having multiple assistants when performing a reduction!
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	It seems we're discussing the final steps in the reduction process!
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	It seems we're discussing the final stages of the reduction process!
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	It seems we're discussing the post-reduction care and treatment plan!
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	It seems we're discussing the final stages of the treatment plan!
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	It seems we're discussing what to do if the joint doesn't heal properly!
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	It seems we're discussing what to do if the patient experiences gravity-related issues during the reduction process!
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	It seems we're discussing the process of treating the joint after the initial reduction!
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread over the linen bandage, so that it is stained.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	It seems we're discussing the process of treating a wound!
Capitol .xxviii.	It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter XXVII!
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	A new chapter!
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	It seems we're discussing the treatment of a wrist dislocation (malassen) that has occurred several times (alcunas vetz), and how it's different from other joint dislocations.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	It seems we're discussing the steps to reduce a wrist dislocation (malassen).
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	It seems we're discussing the importance of considering certain factors when reducing a wrist dislocation (malassen).
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	It seems we're discussing the importance of patience and careful consideration when reducing a wrist dislocation (malassen).
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	It seems we're discussing the importance of understanding and respecting the natural curve and flexibility (tortuositat) of the wrist joint (junctora).
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	It seems we're discussing the post-treatment care and rehabilitation of a wrist dislocation (malassem) after it has been successfully reduced.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	It seems we're discussing the treatment of a wrist dislocation (malassem) that is experiencing stiffness and discomfort after the reduction process.
Capitol .xxix.	It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter XXVIII!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	A new chapter!
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	It seems we're getting started with Chapter XXIX!
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	It seems we're discussing the reduction of a finger dislocation (dislocacio dels ditz) that has occurred in the palmar or dorsal surface of the hand.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	It seems we're discussing the post-reduction care for finger dislocations (dislocacio dels ditz).
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	It seems we're discussing the post-reduction care for finger dislocations (dislocacio dels ditz) in more detail.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	It seems we're discussing the importance of consistent and gentle treatment after a finger dislocation (dislocacio dels ditz).
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	It seems we're discussing the treatment of a wrist or hand dislocation (dislocació al ventre de la ma) that has occurred on the palmar surface.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	It seems we're discussing the treatment of dislocations that have occurred in other parts of the body, beyond just the wrist or hand.
Capitol .xxx.	We've reached the final chapter!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The final chapter!
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	The gravity of the situation!
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The severity of the condition!
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	The final blow!
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The final note!
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	The final words!
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	The final sentence!
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The final note!
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The final sentence!
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	The final details!
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The final instructions!
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The final steps!
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The final note!
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The final moments!
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	The final resort!
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The final solution!
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	The final instructions!
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	The final details!
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	The final details!
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The final tightening!
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	The final instructions!
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	The final revelation!
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	The final treatment!
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	The final note!
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	The final warning!
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	The final warning!
Capitol .xxxi.	We have reached the final chapter of the treatise!
De curacio de anca dislocada.	The title of the final chapter!
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	The wisdom begins!
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The four ways of hip joint dislocation!
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The majority of hip joint dislocations!
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The signs of hip joint dislocation!
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of hip joint dislocation!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The signs of hip joint dislocation!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The signs of hip joint dislocation!
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of hip joint dislocation!
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	The reduction of recent hip joint dislocation!
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	The treatment of persistent hip joint dislocation!
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The extension of the joint or limb!
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The extension of all parts!
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	The common extension!
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	The conclusion!
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	The reduction technique!
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	The powerful minister!
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	The easiest reduction method!
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	The importance of cooperation!
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	The proportions!
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The patient's position!
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The treatment technique!
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	The reduction technique for outward dislocation!
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	The setup for the reduction technique!
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	The final stages of the treatment!
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	The conclusion!
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	The final note!
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	The reduction technique for anterior dislocation!
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	The reduction technique for posterior dislocation!
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	The application of compression!
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	The final stages of the treatment!
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	The final check!
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	The final confirmation!
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	The follow-up care!
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	The final step!
Capitol .xxxii.	The end of the treatise!
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	A new section!
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The types of hip joint dislocations!
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of hip joint dislocation!
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of hip joint dislocation!
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of reduction!
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	The final steps!
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	The final instruction!
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	The final note!
Capitol .xxxiii.	The final chapter!
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	A new section!
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The types of ankle joint dislocations!
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of ankle joint dislocation!
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of ankle joint dislocation!
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	The treatment of ankle joint dislocation!
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	The positioning of the hands!
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	The reduction technique!
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	The repetition of the technique!
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	The final step!
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	The outcome of the reduction!
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	The alternative approach!
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The final positioning!
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The final check!
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	The final step!
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	The caution!
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	The recovery process!
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	The final stage!
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	The warning!
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	The caution!
Capitol .xxxiiii.	The final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	A new chapter!
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The reduction technique!
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	The positioning!
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	The gentle pressure!
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	The aftercare instructions!
Capitol .xxxv.	The final chapter!
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	The varieties of dislocation!
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	The consequences of neglect!
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	The importance of humility!
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	The importance of prompt treatment!
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	The treatment plan!
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	The complex case!
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	The closing remarks!
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	The final phrase!
Amen.	The final word!
