Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus we begin with the remedies of Albucazim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for the completion of its consequences in it, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you have fulfilled what I wanted from you in this treatise, which is a part of my operation on hand, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the operation on hand is spread throughout our region and in our entire private time, until they have very little perception of its science, and its investigation has been stopped; and I do not remain silent about it except for some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the waters and lead to those errors and hesitations until the intentions of it are closed and its strength is elongated.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you have vivified this hand in the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that they come into the forms of the ferraments of cauteries and other instruments of the work as if by addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why there is no expert artist in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long and it covers the whole actor who needs to be exercised in the science of anatomy which Galen described until he knew the juices of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their precision; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their establishment.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hippocrates said that a name is not enough, but rather in the small work, and mainly in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already said this about him in the introduction of this book; because who does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not exempt from falling into error, by which many men have died, thus you have seen many of them, because they were formed in this science and got away from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has incompetently induced an scrophilous abscess on the neck of a woman, and damaged some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed until the woman nearly died among his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who promised that he would remove a stone from a man's bladder which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone in a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called him to remove that, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and due to the disposition of the patient's body, he was going to die under his hands.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he made a bad incision on the thigh of a man who had a fracture in his leg; and due to the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, above the wound, with pumice stones and asters in strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he dislocated the joint according to his foolish desires, and then he relaxed, and then he left it for several days and commanded that we should not disturb the limb; and it was thus until the thigh and foot became putrid with apostemes, and he came to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have already called him to it, and he has prepared himself to dislocate the limb, and thus he achieved tranquility and also alleviated his own pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption had already spread to the member, so that it could not be restrained, and did not cease to walk with the corruption in the member until the patient suffered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and he ulcerated it for several days, until the evil of it was magnified in his lord's sense.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cancerous tumor was pure melancholic humor, then it did not cover that it would come to him at all, but rather that it was in a member which suffered from everything, and had been held back from everything.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation on hand be divided into two devotions: one is an operation where health is associated, and another work where danger is in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in every place of this book where I have found operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the foolish ones do not take the way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And then take your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are abolished and strengthened.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And you have used the best way for the grace of God to obtain health and laudable success, and you have left the terrible evils of difficult healing, and you have stopped your arms from that which makes you afraid, so that you may stay in your faith and in your name you will not be evasive: because it remains in your glory, and afterwards in the world and finally among your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Although there are some difficulties in this patient's joints:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"There is no medical treatment for a bad case of gout, because bad doctors do not know its name."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have divided this book into three chapters."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter deals with the head entering into the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the ferrumens of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"The division of the second part."
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter, on suction and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of poultices, and of extraction of arrows and of similarities to those, all capitulated and ordered according to the forms of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"The division of the third part."
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and of curvature correction and of similarities to those; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"On cautery I make a focus and medicine acute and reminiscence of the operation."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"I begin the treatise on the entire book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"So that I indicate the quality of the juvenations of that cautery and of its instruments, and in what complexity it is prohibited to use cautery."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juvenation of cautery and of its instrument is long and prolix, and subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree with each other, and I need a little bit of their sermons, fearing prolongation."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"Therefore I say that cautery corresponds to the entire universal complexity, which is either matter or multiple matters, except for two complexities, which are warm complexities of matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"In the warm and dry complexity matter disagrees; because some said that cautery is juvenated to that, and others said the opposite of that, that cautery is not convenient in bad gout which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that bad gout warm and dry matter is healed by cautery and dryness."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And they say that those who say the opposite of that, that by cautery it is made juvenation in all bad warm and dry gout that occurs in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies with the humidity of them to the complexity of fire, you find that men's bodies are cold."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say by the sermon of that, that experience has already taught me some things to discover."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"Moreover, I do not know what comes over that which has already been experimented and exercised in the chapter of cautery for the last exercise, and to know the diversity of the complexity of men's bodies and the disposition of their gouts in their meteyssas, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"Moreover, in the other complexities, it is not about your fear, and especially in the cold and humid gouts, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree about the juvenation with cautery in those."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And you know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery is fire and its goodness, so on cautery I make comburent medicine, because the fire is simple, the action of which does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not touch another member unless it is a small nuisance."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"Moreover, the action of comburent medicine penetrates to that in the members which are affected by it, and strongly makes them come into the difficult-to-heal gouty member and strongly assists."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"Moreover, fire, by its sublime nobility and goodness of substance, does not do anything but overflow; and it is already known to us through experience and long service of studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that I have excused the length of the sermon; and if it were not that I did not read my own book in this pause to you, secretly hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion by which it expels gouts, a philosophical sermon demonstrated, which would be acute in your own footsteps."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And you know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to use cautery and pause at the best time of spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the nuisance from the accidental time is submerged in the juvenation of that which I have with cautery, and especially if cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fast, which do not suffer delay so that it is feared by those who bring malice, which is greater than small nuisance entering at the wrong time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And you do not see in your footsteps, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that gout which is healed by cautery, it does not return at all times, and they pause at that consequence."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not so because the doctors do not understand that cautery is only in place of medicine, which alters the complexion and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Perhaps emperor, I will place cauteries superficially on medicine to show the value and truth of its operation and greatness of your wise lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the disease returns at some point in time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease, and its truth, and what has been prepared in their body through the addition of superfluous humors, and what has happened to them in acquiring habits and semblances of those causes; unless the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease with few superfluous humors and moisture, thus as cautery for toothache and similar to that, it is possible that in them no pain returns, but rather it is made small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is a common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, for they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved through medicine or any other cause that would make them resort to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when they administer the methods of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and thus at the end of the cause they administer cautery, and it is made suitable for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here onwards it is clear that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, but rather according to the intention which understands the simple and foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that the ancients believed that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the limitation of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as if it is not absolutely true, because you have already probed and experienced that it does not do so except in certain bodies like the others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, thus as they said; but emperor, when you perform cautery with golden focus, it is not for you to declare, because it depends on the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepare to receive heat; and if you adjust over the ignited focus, the gold melts per the focus, and sometimes in the focus some layers are made so that the artisan can occupy themselves with that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore it is done with iron cautery, we do not push lightly and do not propose immediately the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that I can clarify what is demanded from them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cautery for headache caused by coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the servile accident of which there are two causes, thus it is the cause of swelling and multitude of flux rheumatic, called corrissa, from the head to the divisions of the veins and of the fluent auricles, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and of gout, and universally of all diseases that come from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and similarly in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate the medicine in a laxative manner from the mundane head, for three or four nights, according to the truth of the patient and their age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then it commands him to shave his head with a razor, and then makes him sit between his thighs on a warmed-up bench and places his hands over his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then places the razor of his palm on the sole of the foot between the veins of his nose.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perhaps emperor, as the doctor said in my place, it has happened, thus that place is tender, and then ignite the olive oil cautery, of which this is the form.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then places that on the sensitive spot that is tender, in a manner that descends, in which the doctor's hand is constricted little by little, and you turn it around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lifts his hand lightly and regards the spot, and if you see already from the bone being uncovered some quantity of hair, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then lifts his hand, and if it does not turn to his hand in that iron, or another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen from the bone what I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then takes a little salt and dissolves it over the spot and leaves it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then places it on the bent edge of the box and leaves it on top until the crust of the focus is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cures the spot with four-part angelic water until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the Roman plague breaks out, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more jovial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They should remove some of those that are to be cauterized from the code inward into the bone, and hold the cautery inward so that it is burned in some part of the bone's thickness.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then return to what has been adjusted on the bone, and then take care.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They should also push the cautery through to the back, until it penetrates into the bone strongly, so that the bone breaks, and this is the way to release small fractures:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate at that place where the vapors of the head expire.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And hold the open wound for a long time, and then take care until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two special kinds of cauteries in everything, except in some homes according to the way of fear; and therefore, you must, my better health is there, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity of the same as we have testified in other members, and mainly when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the kind of cautery first mentioned is more salvaged and better for me; and from that house and in that work I am healthy.
Capitol segon.	Following chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the entire head aches with chronic and long pain and it is in prolonged illness, and uses remedies of poultices and of bandages and of cupping glasses and of plasters and of ointments and of catheters and of similar things, and mainly if it has been cauterized by a cautery which recounts and does not alleviate any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and troublesome with great cold, then that cautery is another cautery besides the one mentioned.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauteries that one on the horn of the dry head with a cautery inward so that the code is parted.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the code and discover the quantity of bone which we have recounted and cautery that one with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place which is called "vas" — and it is that place where the windy pause is made.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in that way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient suffers so much great diverse pain from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you will direct this cautery to its place, because it is necessary that the cautery which is being cauterized on the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtly cauterized than that which is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the way of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-ancient migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain dwells in the head's partition, or it is stagnant pain inward to the fontanel, then evacuate with medicines that moderate the head, and then administer another cure, which you have stated in the devotions of illnesses; and if not alleviated, then cautery is in two ways: either cautery with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	One cautery with acute burning medicine is that you take a handful of salt, and scrape it off and bind the extremities of the hand with both hands on the heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet inward so that it is in the same location behind the code, so that it is concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen over it with a stopped constriction, and leave that for three hours' space; and then remove the dressing and treat the wound, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then pause on the submerged joint in a bandage until the place forms a crust.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that one with a poultice inward so that it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, make those some burning medicines which I have written about in the twelve treatises of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	One cautery with iron is according to this way: ignite for cautering which this is the form.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus formed like a nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the acidity which is beneath is not burned — and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it which is burned by the thickness of the code is thus as much as its greatness, and hold your hand so that the artery is not burned which is beneath, so that no flux of blood comes.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then embibe the joint in salt water and pause that on the place, and leave that for three days; and then pause the joint wrapped in a bandage, and then cure with a poultice inward so that it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you want, cautery the extremity of the cutaneous according to cautery, and beware of incision of artery in this non-ancient migraine specifically.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of old migrating humors.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migrating humors in the way that we have spoken of before, and as we have divided into types of illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes because of the illness that does not respond to what we have said about the first cauterization or fire in medicine, then it is necessary to ignite the cauterizing iron until it whitens, since it indicates on the line of the long axis of the part where the pain is, or thus; and pause your hand for a while and strengthen it before you pierce the artery and penetrate to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to take care of the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by chewing, and that the tendon is not injured and the nerves are not affected, so that no spasms occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is blocked, because in the blockage of it there is fear, and greater harm to he who ignores what he does and is not studious and experienced; and thus the operation begins at this point.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find in the remembrance of the regulation of blood flow by chance of the artery, according to its own manner, in its own place of this free book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cauterization and you see the body of the patient is tolerable, cauterize it in the middle place of the head as we have recounted, and cure the plague until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the stretching of arteries by cautery having two ends, and it is a better cauterization than this one and more confident.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is treated with laxative causes and another treatment which I have said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has been named pointed, of which this is the form.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And point the pointed instrument at the ignition, and it should be directed towards the entire ear as if rotating, or in a circular motion around any area where the pain is.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Gradually I go with the cautery along the root of the ear, little by little, until I feel that I have reached the spot where I aim.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you make points on the entire ear with the cautery, and thus, and then cure the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of gout.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Gout which is treated and cured by cauterization is not just of the species that come through flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	It is necessary to cauterize the species that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of gout with herbs and head-purging and gargling, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the illness with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your hand with the cautery on the opposite side of the ailing part, because mollification does not occur unless on the side that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, slightly above the crown of the head, and in another temple, the length of which is according to the length of the digit, and pause your hand at the cautery until the quantity of the pain of the specific code is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of cutting iron, the form of which is described in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more subtle because that one little thing thus seems; and it is necessary to cut into the excess fat a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area where it is described in the process until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter seven.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not work and the illness has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the crowns of the head; and with the cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with the cautery in the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said before.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And then it is cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more backward; and then it is cured with what proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter eight.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	From the cautery of oblivion made for fluxation.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Because they have given to the patient in the beginning of the illness great and pilling serving magnificent medicines.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then you will take off the whole head of the patient and place it on the wooden board of this described plaster in the treatise of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place those cooled burners, because that is the manner of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it secondly according to the method which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if the patient is not better; and if not, then make three cauteries on the rear part of his head, which are dependent on the superior part of the head down to the part below the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the greatest thickness of the finger, and then take care that the cautery is made as it is proceeding.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you see the patient is tolerant of that, then make the cautery in the middle place; and if you see major tolerance, then cautericize it above both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then take care that it enters until he is healed; and let the olive oil cautery be according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Because you are proceeding in magnificent healing of the head with jaundice and with what we have said; and then take off the patient's head, and then cautericize it with a cautery in the middle place of the head, and cautericize it above all the horns of the head, and cautericize it on the rear part of it, and make three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to remove that and the patients are tolerant and the illness is strong, then cautericize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make a cautery until it is combusted from the cold humors of it, and raise the tied hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then take care that it enters until he is healed, and this cautery is with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not a cautery for the epileptic, but that epilepsy is from fluxation.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore it is because we mend the brain of him at the beginning of his years and another cure which we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is an infant who does not suffer from medicines, then administer gentle and softening serving magnificent medicines, previously given for many days, with a good purification of the veins.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then take off the patient's head, and then cautericize it with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery on the occiput of it, and above each horn of the head it will be cautericized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cautericize it with the cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the olive oil cautery be according to what has been previously said.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is an infant, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cautery of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and great fluxation, then cautericize it with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him something that purifies his brain according to what has been previously said in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then take off the patient's head, and then make a decent torrefaction of those above the circle, and then place it in the middle place of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let him be held by all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then place a liniment; and it is better to anoint with old oil of olives.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for temperate warmth by measure, which it is said to suffer when it is mixed in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that in the middle place of his head in the circle, and let it enter until he is refreshed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that to the patient for a whole week, another regimen of his good until he is healed; or if you wish, cautericize it making small points according to the size of him, but hold your hand with one cautery thus ordered: this is a special type of cautery which humidifies the brain in equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that covered in bandages or in gray wraps of wadding.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery of water descending into the vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the commencement of water in the vessel through the pipes which you have placed in division, then begins and gives in drinking to the patient that which monifies the head of him, and guards that from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sugar dissolve in water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery on the middle of the head; and also cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the commencement of watering in two vessels, or one side if it is the commencement of watering in one vessel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Inside, you will cauterize all the veins and arteries which are located at the back of the neck; and place the cauteries in that length along the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, or remove the limb with some medicine, which is to you possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the removal of those and in caution against fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized at the neck behind two bones with two cauteries, immediately producing.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the vessels are old and accumulated and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before, and it is verified that this is a superfluous flux of phlegmatic matter, then cauterize that with a pointed cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the commencement of watering caused by the vessels, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries behind both bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you indicate an addition, then cauterize that on the entire side of the vessel above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small pointed cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the Cauterization of Foul Odor of the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate that with water which we have said in the division and does not perfect your medication, then prepare and give in drinking to the patient three nights; and raise his head, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery more gentle than an olive-tree cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a keyed cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows behind the hair, a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery that you do not injure it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the keyed cautery, this is the method.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the Cauterization of Softening of the Eyelids of the Vessels.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the vessel is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery of this lunar cautery; and this is its form.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries in the entire partition, and then they will be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Vessel when the skin is converted to the internal parts and punctures the vessel.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the vessel is converted to the internal parts and punctures the vessel, cauterize in those places according to two manners, because either it is with iron or it is with combustible medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize with fire, command the patient to hold still that which reads the six skin layers thus as those which are worldly, until they are prolonged and enlarged; and if you puncture that which deviates from its proper place, then strengthen the vessels of him with a band so that it is not moved until the skin is born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Since they are born and enlarged, then pause the head of the patient in the same place, and place a sign above the eyelid of the vessels of him with a tent, and signal that which is according to the figure of the leaf of myrtle, and it is the commencement of the proper signal of the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then pause with cotton in a bundle of wool or in a mucilage of ptilly above the vessel.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery of which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize above the figure which has been signified, little by little, in well-ordered motions, until the surface of the neck is combusted, which is thus as a leaf of myrtle, totally appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the signal of sanitation of the entire work is that you see the eyelid of the vessel already contracted and the skin of him elevated from the puncture of the vessel.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place a poultice on the affected area so that the wound may be healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then take care to apply an ointment inside so that it may be healthy.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Sometimes it returns to the skin for some reason, and then the eyelid is softened, so do another application of the cautery on the entire area, just as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	Sometimes the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize that inside so it may be elevated to its natural place and be enclosed, and the skin does not puncture the vein.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Sometimes the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift the skin inside so it may be prolonged and enclosed, and then make a paper template in the shape of a leaf of mint.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap made from congealed goose fat and living snake's water. I think there might be a mistake! The text you provided doesn't seem to make sense in the context of medieval medicine. So here's the water, and then mix those causes well, and make that into a fermentation so it may not be frozen; and then spread it over the paper which was made thus in the shape of mint leaves, and place it on one vein of both arms; and place below the vein, enclosed in albumen of egg white, and the head of the patient should be in the same position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the finger on the medicine and apply a little of it, not too much, so that the patient feels the biting sensation of the medicine, because the biting sensation is in it just like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then as you will perceive that the bitter sensation is gone, then remove the medicine and wash your fingers; then as the biting sensation ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the vein with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid has been lifted thus as it has been washed away from the constriction of fire or incision, because then it will be; and if it does not return to that place where the medicine was not applied and is not denied until the operation is enclosed and the vein is constricted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place on the affected area with a poultice in order to eradicate the root of the inflammation, and then take care to apply an ointment or another remedy so that it may be healthy.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, because of your operation, to keep diligent vigilance so that the remedy does not fall on the vein, and if the eyelid becomes softened after several days and some cause of the skin punctures the vein, then repeat your medicine on the place where the eyelid was softened, and properly thus as it was done at the beginning, and then apply it inside so that it may be healthy.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of mint leaves.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the veins of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and thus according to this, your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it will not be confused the way of direct treatment with that which was studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of fistula that is in the tear duct of the vein.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of the diseases and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head thus in the same position, and hold the head of some minister between the thighs in such a way that it may not be moved nor agitated by the seated head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place the poultice infused with egg white or in a mucilage of ptilli over the vein of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be conical, thus as it is in the shape of a reed or a point of a wing, from one extremity to which the cautery was made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate inside to the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out thus as you intended.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Sometimes the emperor orders that which is cooked is better for the entire work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then take the fistula if it is opened, and draw out the bloody serum and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on the vein the cautery which was well ignited, and you have that in your hand a little away from the cautery of the vein at the bridge of the nose, so that it does not err with your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the vein and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then at the beginning of the vein cautery, it is seen to enter into the bone; well; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then place on that affected area with a poultice and enclose it in an ointment exsiccated inside so that it may be healthy.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been passing eleven days and there is no health, then stop using the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the seventh chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And it is another method of cauterizing the fistula, which previously mentioned doctors: then at the place of the fistula, make a hole and apply a subtle instrument in the shape of it; put in it a quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand firmly on it, so that the lead does not penetrate to the hollow of the patient; and be careful to apply it to the hollow of the patient's body or in albumen of egg white or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it marvelously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterizing and treatment, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice of the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the body of the nose according to how it will come into its own place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the fracture of the toes.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Wounds or cracks that occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you treat those cracks as we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is taught.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And it is the conquest of it according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place it gently in those cracks until the cautery penetrates to the bottom of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with wax until it is healthy.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an aposteme and then it breaks, and then it bursts, and then it becomes chronic, and correct the break and make a fistula, and then you treat it and do not deepen your treatment, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited thing in the poultice of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron ignites at the bottom of it, and afterwards make one or two wounds; and then treat it with what we have said about treatment until it is healthy.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the ulcer is abscessed and healed, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and extract the corrupted bone according to how it will come into its own chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide in them, then place the head of the patient in a straight position, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come forth, thus that you place the cotton on the tooth and insert it into the ignited cautery, holding your hand firmly so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be penetrated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to how you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is toned up and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness, or if there is cold or worm in it, or does not respond to medical treatment, then cauterize it according to two methods: either cauterize with a cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing with a cow's horn is to take a cow's horn and boil it in a kettle of iron, and then take it out and wrap it around the extremity of the tongs, and then dip it into the boiled horn, and place it on the aching tooth firmly until it is cooled down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat it several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, dip a needle or a thread into the aforementioned horn, and place it on the aching tooth, and place it on the ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the bottom of the conquest of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, be careful with the cauterization by fire that you attend to the quantity of iron or of fire, and it is in the heart of some grossness and the acuteness of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled down; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And then the patient should receive the impression of that cautery, which will fill their mouth with good odor and hold it for an hour; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	You should cauterize at the point where you feel extreme pain, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of deformed limbs.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When deformed limbs are of a fluid and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you want the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form of which is this following, having two hollow extremities to introduce smoke through the cautery into the other extremity, and pause that ignition over that aposteme for a while, and another if it is indicated for that, until it reaches the root of the aposteme.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and leave it for three days and pause over the inflamed area in good odor until it is removed what the fire has consumed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that wounded limb with tents and dressings until it is healthy.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the tube or of the two cauteries is to be conveyed thus.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of ulcers of the voice and of constrictions of the wings.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is with a complexity of completion, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that which is the root of the galleon in the predetermined place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not reach the cautery to the galleon nor burn the coding of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the spine in the posterior part of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be shaped according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that which is preceding until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of diseases of the lung and of coughs.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughs and lung diseases are of cold humors and the patient has no fever nor thirst and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the predetermined places, lengthwise and widthwise; and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and shape the cautery according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization should be pointed with the cauteries that are called points, the form of which is preceded in the pontication of pain of kidneys.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And point them until they reach those; and then heal that which is preceding, until it is healthy.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauteries have three ramps because cauterization is like that: in one way you can do three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of stiffness that is at the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating cold humors and does not stop at the hour of its return, until it is in its customary place of returning, and then through a small movement it is dislocated thus that it is endeavored, thus as we have testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation primarily, and then the patient should be reversed over the two hips or over the sides; and then elevate the coding which is in the inner part of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cauteries having two heads; and this is their form.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the coding until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization then with four heads of cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and thus those subtleties according to the quantity of tension; and this is their form.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some times it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cauteries poured with salt water, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a shaped cautery or three pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and humidity come into the stomach until it extracts its completion and is multiplied there, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confirm, then it is necessary for the patient to be on their back with legs raised, and extend their hands and their thighs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger in a shaped cautery, and two cauteries below the two sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangular cautery appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so they will make purging.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery reaches the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the scab on the knee.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery is added in this form, and if you want, make a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach is cautered at that point to whom this cautery brings fear: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want to hold, and then cautere that with a cautery at the points; and then take care of that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cautery of the fetid fever.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the fever is induced in the foot by coldness or humidity or gross ventilation until it deviates from its normal complex composition and is treated with the remedy that we have said and not comforted, then it is necessary to resupinate the patient on their bed, and feel with a probe three cauteries according to this form and this quantity measured on the foot below the hip bones, where one perceives the decubitus of home.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the said finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery motion.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the marrow of the spine of the knee, and it is not further adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and lifted their shoulders.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterie these cauteries with a cuticular cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed excessively in the cautery, and let the spine of the whole knee be absorbed so that it is absorbed throughout the body and penetrates into the intestines, because the knee here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess of the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an ulcer or abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel grave trouble and pain are acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tendon of the foot, then the pain is greatly acute and many times the doctors are fatigued by the cure of it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned over on their bed; and then make a sign on the place of the abscess with a probe; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a rod, the form of which has been described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterie it with that cautery until the whole knee is burned, until it reaches the hip, until it scorches the sanious humor.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it for the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the hands of which many maladies are known; however some experiments have been ventured upon this operation, however I will leave that to those who do not see us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cautery of ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology ulcers burn according to this manner of being a doer, and it is that which you take from the roots of Aristology, a long dry root that is found, and let it be of the thickness of the said finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and expose it to the fire, and then cauterie it with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the fork and the neck; and there are two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and there are two cauteries where it declines between the fifth rib and the nipple, declining slightly towards the back parts; and there is another cautery in the middle of the foot, and another on the stomach, and three cauteries of the back parts; and there is a cautery at that place which is between the two shoulders, and there are two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be in the manifest of the code in operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And thus I have described the ancient authors who are the ancient ones of men who use iron cauteries that resemble a ray and ignite it, and place it in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach the abscess and burn sanious humor, just as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation, I do not use a pointed cautery, because it is not suitable for the time when the humor accumulates in the fistula, which does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the worse (or "of the worst").
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the worst part of the disease, as we have said about the treatment in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cautery it in three ways, all of which are straight, one of which is to make three or four linear cauteries according to the length of the worse part, according to the shape of the cauteries on the foot, the shape of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be a space of about a finger's width or a little more between each cautery, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as we have said in the cautery on the foot, namely, in an oblique direction.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be elevated above the two cushions.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of cauterying, which is that you should ignite the cautery having two virtues, which causes we have said in the chapter on dislocation of muscle, and elevate the codena which is at the end of the worse part where it feels the pain of the patient's sinister side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be the one that elevates the codena according to the length of the body, so that you make straight cauteries according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two virtues, igniting motion, in that entrance where they penetrate the codena on the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus you will have made four straight cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cautery with a cautery having three virtues.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you will cure the cautery better than to have tried to grasp or to hold for three days, because it is more comfortable that the other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery of hydropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not made on hydropsy itself, but rather in adjacent areas properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat hydropsy, the methods of treatment are those which we have said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauteries be four cauteries in the circle of the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the foot, and one cautery on the worse part, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the specificity of the codena.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it can hold for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment then with the cautery as it is necessary for them to be added to the two intentions, and they will be fixed to their helper for health.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery that is applied to the belly should be club-shaped according to what its shape was previously, and it is that which is applied to the back and should be olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostemated in hydropsy and full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cautery the feet on the back of the foot at night, in a place that is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand over the cautery and do not press on it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the stagnant water resists.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a straight cautery at the extremity of the cautery cutter.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery is according to the length of the thigh: one at the knee and the other at the middle place of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And then leave the open wound for a long time, so that some stagnant water resists from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat them with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the belly and intestines.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly and intestines are full of cold and humidity inside, so that they weaken the vertebrae, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with those methods of treatment and do not confuse, and sometimes the patient suffers from exhibiting a cautery of virtue, then cautery it with a large cautery on the navel stomach according to what has preceded in the cautery of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four cauteries in the circle of the subtle navel, with a club-shaped subtle cautery; and a cautery on the alcantin above the great alloy, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if at times the exuberant humors and the patient tolerate it, then cauterize that over the perineum and over the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, because it is a perfect cure for juvenile gout, which does not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that corrupts or of corrupted humors, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confer evil cure, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus below the spine of the small and small triangular, and with a cautery above the umbilical region for two digits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that their stomach is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face sometimes appears apostemed, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cautery according to what has been described; and with one cautery on the arm, and another cautery on their waist with a clave-shaped cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time open, and afterwards take care that they are healed inside.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of athelia, suitable for their removal.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove athelia, then you ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into that removed athelia, and finally touch the hand inside so that you bring the cautery to the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make that an option or two, because if the achievements are tropes, then cauterize some of them according to what we have recounted, and afterwards take care of those who confer benefits to their joints until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the buttocks, it is more beneficial in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature of the patient's parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is desperate for it, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when you have a fistula in the patient's nature, and it is ancient, corroding their sanity and corrupted humors, then that which is more worthy to be covered is that which proceeds with a subtle thread, and afterwards you will know the quantity of the depth of the said thread according to the previously mentioned subtlety.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you introduce the thread.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that cautery until those corrupted bodies are completely burned, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards take care of the place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and you have removed from it the materials, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting their bone, or it falls into those causes of which there will be remembrance in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the kidneys.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or gross ventosity, and therefore the coyt of the patient's hip is weakened, then it is necessary that you cauterize that over the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a clave-shaped cautery from which proceeds the remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize them according to the second small indication, so that three lined cauteries will come, and then they will be more beneficial in youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to cold and humors, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that in the part below the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the notes of the pulse; and cauterize that with a cautery in the part below the lower back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a clave-shaped cautery according to what has been described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the matrix (or womb).
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the matrix is humid and swollen, and for this reason it is prohibited to take action, and the muscles are corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and it causes pain in the joints, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and do cautery on the area above the back, or use two cauteries, and let the cautery be clavicular.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When humidity accumulates and is deposited in the ankle joint, and it causes effusion of the fluid in that place, and it is signified by the fact that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is touched in the boy's thigh.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient's ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have signified in the circuit of the joint similarly as it is revolved, and for this reason the joint falls into its proper place within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be the one that precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize with three cauteries in the olive-shaped great cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and properly cure that which enters, so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with that which we have said and does not contradict, and that which is ancient, then it is necessary to free the patient from gross humors with foul-smelling pills or artificial ones or similar; and then cauterize accordingly.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medications, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that which cauterizes the area above the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space be between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the said and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some well-placed cauteries should be on the middle place above the head of the ankle because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, there where the circle contains and burns the inspection of the entire code.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in every case when pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh above the place where the patient's pain environs; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers' width below the most tender part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutting, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient environs that the pain is extended into the place near the fingers of the feet, then cauterize there where it environs with three points or four, or more if it is necessary for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient environs pain being below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize there with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not ultimately use the cautery so much that it burns nerves or great arteries, and that for this reason you are above the patient's bad nuisance or contradiction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the hip and ultimately in the cauterization, and the burnt focus inflamed within so that the tumor reached the foot, and burnt and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then a strong solution of wine, and then death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of ankle joint cauteries, of which this is the manner: make it similar to a circle of iron wire, whose circumference is the size of one palm; and let it be of seven orifices according to the thickness of one finger's bone or almost a little.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of the nail of the thumb; and those circles are used for two parts; and let their length be one nail or two nails, and make them decently appareled in iron margins fitting to the circles; and this is their form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be ignited in the fire until it is red-hot and gives sparks, and then let it be placed above the ankle joint, the patient seated on a mat.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Then burn with three red-hot cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And leave it like that for three days; then plaster it with bandages and leave the open wound to suppurate for several days; and then heal it from the inside out so that it becomes healthy.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Disciples of Albucasis: oh, sons, we have used this type of cautery little, for fear of the regard of the ruler, and because we have rarely found those who regard it above him.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May the good cauteries be applied to him who suffers, and may they pierce the area of his pain.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauteries be medicines that adhere, so you make two circles having an armored perforation in which the iron point of the door's hinge is inserted; it is the length of the wall in the nudity of their sign, two nodes or those irons.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between almost the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and it is opened below and above, and it is that they contain themselves among their following this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then stop on the partition of the water where the patient lies on the mattress, and comprehend your hand on the partition of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to feel the burning and the adjustment of it — because that burning feels like fire — until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and abstract the hot water from all the water in the water doucette.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it like that for three days and stop on that bandage until the blackness of the adjusted remedy remains, and leave it like that for several days, and correct his purging; this is the last stage in the treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it from the inside out so that it becomes healthy.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make a statue of him in which he contains water according to what is done in the bathing tank.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and non-extinguished burning of both hands, and truss them and stop in a new bowl of which the partition below is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into his vein.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And stop below the bottom of another bowl enveloped, and gather above that alkaline and non-extinguished burning of warm water which covers them for a finger, and then you comprehend them with the good compression of your hand, and leave the hole that descends from his warm water in the partition below to the enveloped bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and gather it above another non-extinguished burning and other alkaline renovating, because at that time it will be of much stronger acuity, which is administered in many operative actions of medicine and in the cauterization of the other members, because that operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus of the medicines some are those which are cauterized often, like this you will find and mix and burn with a wise art, and thus they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure in which he was cured of pain from water and sciatic vein, and magnified much to be that of him, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because he is healthy for one go, thus I strongly recommend, because he was inserted in bath and thus he knew of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that he took certain green certarragi, and if not found green, take fresh figs recently; and much was trussed with a few gray hairs and placed under the water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and so be laid.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it was left for a duration of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in bath and then when his body is relaxed, insert it into the soil, because the pain ceases and he becomes healthy.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you know that one should not cover how to use these medicines with cauteries unless it is for the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May I, Escorides, say that when the vein of the goat's head is cauterized, it is good for him; and it is the cautery in his following manner: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's head and inflame it with fire until it becomes carbonized; and then stop it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then iterate this, and do not cease doing this until the sensation of the burning reaches into the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cautery of cowpox.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of pain in toes.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some toe pains are caused by many reasons, such as by injury or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, by infusion of cold and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not used except in this one special case which is made for the effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, cover, then evacuate the patient with small, fitted pillows and similar to theirs, which are made for the toes where the pain is three lines according to the width of them, because you will have a tent in each line or cauteries, more or less, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the strength of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And make a pointed cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four at the middle of the clave-shaped cautery, according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease begins in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they stumble upon their structure, with elevation and limitation of movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it starts in the back of the spine of the toes and fingers, which then begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize with that cautery which is circular in shape according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine, including.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the circle of the spine with a pointed cautery two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points are properly placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the place inward so that it is healthy with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is made by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And so how gout caused by cold is cured in many ways of cure and the pains are not removed, then they remain and need cauteries.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you should cauterize with evacuation around the circle of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And make an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains penetrate into the teeth or other joints, and many times it begins there, then cauterize with three cauteries or four from the entire affected part with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed, which these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize with them and do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery beforehand, but only surround the specific area of the code.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate into the teeth and toes, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands as much, and it is called sciatica, then prick around the circle of the ankles thus as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick around the circle of the ankles above each finger and on the edge of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains penetrate deeply into the joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected areas of the entire joint.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is made with good regimen and the weakness is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the limbs and the intestines are torn apart from the cavity to the genitals, and this is the beginning of evacuation, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to rest his consumption for seven days and use gentle causes so that the wound heals in the seventh day.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands above the seventh toes, and command him to hold the seventh wing inward so that it is not torn or separated from the cavity or intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the ties of the fingers and sew with thread the rupture above the bone of the thumb, signaling the extremity of which it is similar to the circle of the sub-branches of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cauteries of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is very red and has many sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that sign at your hand, making sure to hold it straight, and apply it to those parts of the pentaghnel joint within the middle of the duodenum; and if you do not succeed in the first application, try again with the other vein if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, lest it causes death or another great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you apply the cautery, do not touch the bones, as this does not contribute to your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And take care that the cautery for children is subtle according to their age and measure of theirs.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then take care to dress the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage, until the scab from the burn is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of those who have other wounds until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should sit on their back for 40 days, until the area is sealed and the plague is purged.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And take care to adjust the nourishment of the patient according to the length of time of their cure, which will strengthen their stomach, and ensure that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is desired to get up after 40 days, administer decently made liniment, and keep that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And avoid excessive labor and replenishment of food and drink, and violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of healing, they will be entirely healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you will direct the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you want that it does not become worse, then cautery the rupture with a red-hot iron according to its quantity, and it is that which is expelled from the codena thus like the third part of it; and then take care of what we have said, and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And you will discover some first principles that the rupture is cautered with a triangular iron according to this form, because it is marked on the tender part:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is a paused line that goes for the width in the lattice below, above the rupture, and another line underneath; and place your hand with a claw-like cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Hernias.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain is felt in certain members due to falling or percussion and it persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cautery with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And it is the cautery of each member according to its size and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location of hernia and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if one is not healed by the first cautery, it is so; and if not, then apply again to him the cautery; because it is customary with those pains that they are punctured in a member adjacent to the one to which you approach, so that you know that those parts are cautered until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The leprous ulcers are cautered with a great judgment, and it is better if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And thus as you want to cautery that, consider if the leprosy is common and as it is cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, neither is this, and fear about the patient that the corruption comprehends all of their body and all its complexity, then cautery that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and one on the forehead to the end of the hair; and two above the ears; and one behind, on the nape or service.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand with the cautery a little inside so that it impresses a small impression on the bone, and then the scabs are dislodged, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and cautery on the worst part according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cautery with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheek, and two cauteries on each vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on each thigh, and one on each ankle, and two on each heel, and one on each knee, and two on each muscle, and two on the tendons of the sole foot; and cautery on all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each talon of the soles of the feet, and on the flexions of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves that lie above the ankle, lest you disturb them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some veins are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more you will benefit and confer; and know that the patient does not have pain from the cautery, thus as they have said, for the body of the patient is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints, as is predetermined by the specific iron instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the cautery with a warm cloth at first and another treatment within, so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stiff or numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and it is not healed, then you cautery that stiff member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the cautery enter into the narrowness of the channel of the code a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that one by applying an ointment within, so that it may be healthy.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some veins are cauterized for a certain stupor that goes to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back, and it is the removal of the stupor that damages those nerves which govern that member.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	There is no pressure on this except what is known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves to the entire moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On Cauterization of Ulcers that are Morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not respond to the application of medicinal ointments, then you cautery above it with a pointed cautery a little according to the quantity of the specificity of the channel within, so that the whiteness and color of it may be restored, and its color may be changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that one with warm cloths and lentil wraps with rose oil and leaves of arnagrosa, and blood of dove or blood of pigeon, each one a part and all are mixed together, and then place a clean cloth and put it on the area within, so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On Cauterization of Cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to remove that tumor, then cautery it with a circular cautery in its circuit, thus as it is turned around.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And I will show you that it is cauteryed with the last cautery in the middle place; I have not seen this, because I think it is ulcerated, and also I have seen some veins.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is afterwards necessary that it be cauteryed in its circuit with a circular cautery thus as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On Cauterization of Abdominal Swellings.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abdominal swelling is delayed in maturity, and it is because of the superfluous fat that makes it, or because of the patient's state, since it is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturity of the abdominal swelling; then cautery it in its circuit with many small pointed cauteries; and afterwards leave it alone, for it will fasten in maturity.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and pause it in the middle place of the abdominal swelling within, so that it penetrates the channel.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cautery in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal it within, so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On Cauterization of Corrosions.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a corrupting ulceration in the member, which corrodes it thus as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if you touch that corrosion in the place where it suffers from cauteries with fire, then ignite clave-like cauteries, many small ones, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where there is corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cautery it entirely, so that you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it alone for three days, and apply a mixture of oil and herbs on the cauteryed places, so that all scars may be eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then heal it with fleshy ointments that generate flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, good; if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted in the corrupt places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated with some old medicines with sharp medicine, because that is half in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	Maybe it's better to cauterize at a focal point of pus to remove the juvenile humor.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already said the treatment of his medicine in the division, and therefore take that one which has authority from his auras.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterization of wounds and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Mortified wounds are found in the lower parts of the foot affected by gout, which is a gross, inward cause, which burdens the foot; and one should cauterize in two ways, namely, cauterizing at a focal point and cauterizing with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Maybe it's better to cauterize at a focal point, which is like igniting the cautery with a similar pain to a burning, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the entire affected part, and should have subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then stop that ignition on the wound, and then return your hand to the cautery in the circle of the wound until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wound.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it like that for three days until it begins to form a scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with malicious-looking herbs saved in salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, because it will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place infected with generating flesh until it is healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it doesn't convert, and mortified wounds appear on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer to those places with hot water cautery, and take a cannula of iron or burning heat, and stop it on the wound; and put a small amount of hot water in the cannula, and hold your hand, and you return it to compression of your entire hand, and it should be inserted into the margin of the cannula at the root of the wound, and then release the hot water through the opening of the root of the wound; and wait for the patient a little while for an hour, and then remove it, because the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do it in those places until you have treated all the affected parts of their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those places where the roots of the wounds have been eradicated, and the flesh will regenerate healthily.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or fever from a cold cause, or another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and cauterize on their feet, and on their stomach, cauterize with olives.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of it is relieved and the health of the affected part is restored.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of accidental injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is affected by accidental injuries, and pus-filled wounds appear which are made of gross, corrupt materials; therefore, at the beginning of the treatment, it is necessary that it be cauterized over every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle, the extremity of which is extended to a focal point; or with a root of long  erestology; or with a slow cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And mortified wounds are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not increased, and the superfluous flesh is dissolved, making them healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Maybe it's better that this be done with evacuation through bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of fluxes of bleeding wounds due to incision of arteries.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Mortified wounds are found to have fluxes of bleeding arteries which are incised by the plague that has devoured, or by the incision of apostems or cauteries of the limb, and it seems difficult to remove that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when you reach that point, then you should hold it with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop it there until the mortified wounds are staunched, so that the fluxes of bleeding cease, and do not flow out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then stop at the focus of the cauteries with olive oil and grapes, for a few moments, and exhale over them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them a small or large amount according to the place and the plague in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly, so that you may restore the orifice, and return the cautery until it is bound and restrained, and stops the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the bleeding is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you restore the orifice and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries which are prepared in the focus, and thus do not cease to do this until the bleeding is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Take care that you do not confuse the nerves here, and that another evil comes over the patient besides this one.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	You know that when the arterial flow is healthy, it's not possible to restrict the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four manners: either by cautery as I have said, or by extraction when it's not extracted, because when the extremities are burned they are restricted and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with a tight ligature, or that it be placed on medicinals which virtue is to restrain the blood; and they are strengthened in the pulvinar constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Maybe he who administers decent restraint of the ligature and structure, and strictures drops or by position of burning causes and similarities, does not compare unless it's bitter.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Maybe if it happens to be at some point and there is no doctor present or medicine, then work on the aforementioned indication over the orifice of that vein as I have said, and intend to great constriction within so that the blood is stopped from the superior part of the plague, and above the artery it's not rejuvenated; and above the artery it's aspurgated with water frequently of much great frequency within so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and maybe you will find out whether there is need to cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	It begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and vein section and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the paragraphs of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have said in the first chapter all about the malady in which cautery is convenient and comburent medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the subordinate nature of the head towards the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter for that method, so that it may be helpful to the one who seeks it, then above what he will have demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And therefore I begin here, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter it is about the fear of what is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that which you want to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuated catz, evacuation which is with blood and in which there is life from the aspersion of the vein or incision over the apostema or perception of exit or purification of the wound or extraction of arrow or beginning of rock and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the end of their evacuation, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you may not fall into the situation in which there is danger, because some evacuated causes make you manner of men with many manners of maladies.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is certain that they flee from their malady and it is far from them the death, and thus for the vehemence of what they find of their malady, and for the length of their malady, and in the malady it is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those it is that which gives to your son to have and said, you hope for his health, and the following malady is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not think that you consent to that which comes to you from this manner; and your caution should be greater than confidence and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause about it unless with certain science that verifies it for you, and to which you perceive successful outcome.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And you will be established in the cure of all your maladies of prognosis and indication of it which is converted health, because in that there is aid for you on acquiring fame and memory, of praise and of glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspire your understanding and does not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this distinct chapter according to the chapters that precede in the chapter of cauteries, on the cure from head to feet, so that it may be helpful to you what you demanded of it and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the cure of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this malady has many evacuated cases among the children of the infant state and when the nurse strengthens the head of the infant with her livelihood.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some evacuated cases happen because of a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	Maybe you have not seen this malady except in children; and all those whom I have seen are caught by death, and thus it is to me a sorrowful work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head which was full of water swelled, and the child's head was so magnified within that it could not hold itself because of the greatness of its head, and maybe the humidity made it grow until it died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or moisture is added between the codeina and the bone, or it is added beneath the bone over the kyphosis.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Where the operation is performed if the humidity is between the codeina and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make an incision in a suitable place on the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the form of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And then if the humidity is more augmented and the abscess is larger, then there are two fissures here, according to this method.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is beneath the bone, it is signified that you always close the commissures of the head, utterly divided from all partition and the water is squeezed out when you comprehend that in the same tie and to the internal parts, and it does not appear to be what you are imagining.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary to make an incision in a suitable place on the head with three fissures according to this method.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract the entire humidity; and then strengthen the fissures with draps and plasters; and then apply something on top for six days, and then dissolve the liament and cure the plague with tents and poultices, and strengthen the head in equality; and nourish the patient with dry victuals of little humidity until the member is comforted and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And it is another method of incision, which considers how to appear the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some veins are more in the occipicii, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and then attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the replenishment of water, and finish according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid those veins of blood and mud, lest the patient perish from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries which are near the aurelles, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter following.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are many catarrhs or wounds on the heels or on the feet, and it is antiquated, and it does not confer on that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision in those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then it is necessary when you want to incise those that the patient's reason loses its head, and then fix the place with a rough drap to reveal the arteries, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some drap; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the places of whatever is above the places which are near the aurelles, and they hide until some homes.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then sew over the artery with a tent, and then incise whatever is in the spatula of whatever part is about to be incised, and it is for the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula beneath the artery and turn it to make an incision in the upper parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is released in a pulsating egress, which beats frequently before it ceases.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure from the aurelhe the quantity of space of three digits, and then sew with a tent, and finish within the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And then it is necessary to stop the bleeding of the blood which is six ounces. and far from getting more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the replenishment of the artery of it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone some cause of kyphosis, then incise that so that an abscess does not form unnecessarily.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the plague with plasters and liaments of drap from it, and then cure that in poultices until it is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there are many accidents of emigrational antiquity or chronic wounds, due to humidity and quality in the lactiferous temples, or an old vehement and similar thing to those, and it is medicated with the methods of cure of medicine and that does not confer, then we have spoken about these maladies extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient's reason loses the skin which is in the temples; and it tends to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the sieve-like pulse, and it is hidden until few homes due to vehemence of friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some drap; and then fix the place with a rough drap or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatula in the form that this question is about:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scratch the code with a facilitator that pervades into the artery; and then get in there with an instrument and extract it from the underlying parts so that you extract it from the code and discover it from the tunics which are already there, of the entire affected part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it with an extremity of the inch, and then incise it into a part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and constricted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not pour out completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood from the vitiated veins. within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you ligate it in two places with a double thread of hemp or cord, and do not touch the putrid dregs within the consolidation of the wound and prevent blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery within the bone or with a cutting cautery so that the extremities of it are incised, and stay in place of that same wounded part.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work because the patient has fever or is of complex constitution; since cautery is one of those causes that help to finish the ending humidity, and therefore it is better in youthful age.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to extract the arteries that fill the place of ancient wound, and they are placed over the decently made poultices, and then be cured with secret medicines that make the flesh and calcify within so that it may be healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if meanwhile you are working on another wounded area, then you touch to restringe that blood, or with a cautery, or that fills the place of the wound, and strengthen your hand within so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the tie on the place so that the blood is congealed, and wrap the place with water of vehement coldness so that the acute pain rests, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is more suitable in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have touched the two places with tension, and stop sometimes, much ignorance, until they penetrate to the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it is elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the sharpness of the two points together.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But perhaps if you sharpen the sharpness of the two points it is better, because if you are skilled with two points properly on each wound, and do not incise the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when they are in that condition, heat from the fire is held in them and the flesh is more easily abscessed.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and most gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And it is the space which is between two points, according to the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the cure of bodies of acute and acidic ulcers of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the ulcers are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the cap before, and do not find in that any cause of medical cure, and sometimes the face of the patient already enrogeses and feels in the sieve of ambulation like if it were an ambulation of ants, and the eyes of that one are extinguished, humbled thus that already their skin is constricted, and the eyelids are scabbed by the sharpness of tears, the ancient masters have hidden themselves in the cure of those through this operation, and they do not number that cure among the sparse.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to rub their skin which is on the sieve of the front, and then incise into the front three fissures equally distant according to the length of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuity of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three digits exactly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of spongy apparatus or secret drawers very much with which they extract the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That it is from the division of the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract the whole cord that is between two incisions at the symphysis, which is above the bone, and then make an incision from the middle of the incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then insert this spatula into the first incision and introduce it into the other opening with another instrument called a cutter, which has one part that cuts and another part that does not cut.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And stop the blade of that cutter from reaching the adjacent flesh of the cord, and the blade of the lion's tooth does not reach the bone, and fill in what has penetrated to the middle fissure, and dissect all those veins that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It is better to continue the incision up to where the cord appears, and then make an incision in the middle fissure into another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And since the flow of blood is considerable in quantity, express the places of the blood clots that have congaled.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then stop in each hot fissure of the moist cloth, and stop over those swollen pustules that are inflamed with venom and oil, and beware that no aposteme is generated from a bad ulcer.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, apply the ligature and administer a great infusion of hot water or decoction, and then heal with basilicon ointment and rose oil, and other things that are being applied to cure the sores.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending from the divisions of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there comes catarrh and it continues, and the patient's thighs are somewhat extended, and already their gaze is debilitated, and their eyelids are ulcerated and because of that their skin is affected, and in the front of the head there is acute pain and consequent inflammation, then we know through this accident that the catarrh does not come from many veins of the divisions above, but rather proceeds.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in a middle place of the forehead, a small one for the width (and begin with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and it should be an incision into the bone; and extend your hand from the lacrimal bones of the temples which are swollen from mastigation), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or absorbent cloth, and then replace it between the two lips of the fissure with a moist cloth or absorbent linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen underneath with swollen pustules that are inflamed with venom and oil, so that no aposteme is generated from a bad ulcer.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the aposteme has already diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until it reaches the newborn flesh, and then heal with a regiment of desiccative powder which makes the flesh dry, thus as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony and mix them, and make a plaster and apply it to these sores on the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The total cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, whether it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus as iron and vein, or it is from a plant thus as cinder or fava, or it is a fluxible cause thus as water and venom agree and their semblance, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when peyra falls into the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not adjust nor believe in the ear, and stop the ear at the sun, and if it is peyra, then distill it into some oil of violet or sisami, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the stirring with conditi, and open the nostrils to receive the event of stirring.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then stop in the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the divisions above, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not evacuated, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtle, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten in the gesti, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument subtle of few duplications.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a canal of silver and introduce the extremity of the canal into the trunk of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oil mollified so that nothing gets in except the canal.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with the strong ventilation attraction, because many evacuated matters are gathered with water that we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alum bat or prepared vessel apparatus with which the wings are pressed together a small quantity, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelop it decently paused.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then you will insert that into the tube of the ear to facilitate, and then extract the earwax due to humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	So if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recounted, then you will touch that dentated area where an abscess or spasm is developing.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of touching that is to start by cleansing the patient's vein of phlegmatic humor and extracting the blood according to the manner of his vertigo, and then you will make a circle between your fingers and convert the ear towards the upper parts, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear from which the greyness of it is coming out.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And it is the lunar-shaped fissure that leads to the stone, and, the stone being removed, you can then use an appropriate instrument; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure it until it is healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause residing in the ear is one of the fats that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own judgment, then take a subtle spatula according to this form.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that the absorption of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not think that it is humidified by the vapor of the ear, and place it in small pieces, and propose to extract them with the onyches or subtle gestures, or as if by inscizio, as we have said, because the extraction of it is alleviated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered into the ear, because the patient uses sternutation at the beginning, and fills the entire ear with a lot of vile matter, and pours over that ear in which there is water, and if it is forgotten, well; and otherwise, then take three or four stones and place them according to the length of the finger, and cauterize them in the focus of a small fire, and the patient inserts one of them into the tube of his ear and sounds above one of the parties and percusses with another stone on the stone that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So it does not stop until all the water has been forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water will be forgotten, and you will take pieces of paper or of cotton. and place one extreme end of it in the ear and extend the other extreme end into the fire until it is burned, the wax of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another cotton and do it so many times until all the water is forgotten, and draw that out with a cannula as it has been said about the extraordinary stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of the beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, thus pierce and to its semblance, cure it thus as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes apparition at the sense of the vessel, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and onyches, and the cause of it is more light than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confound your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle onyches, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula strongly stretched and amplified from which this is the form of it.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then suck strongly with water for a strong suction, and do it many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey your own judgment, then operate and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experimented on by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is your effusion which you pour out medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of copper, strongly stretched, in which there is a small tube, and placed thus.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it is how they fill what is in the cavity of the cannula, which will be necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap it decently with wax at the extremity of it, and then put oil in the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want to put in the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with wax thus and express your hand so that the compression is tempered until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And it is necessary that the auricle be scarified with a small focus.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Beware that the cause which you distilled in the auricle is not too frequent, because auricle medicines do not suffer it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ulceration of the auricles.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some evacuated ulcers on the sides of the belly of pregnant women are not perforated, and it happens in some homes, ulceration in the flesh of the auricle due to a plague or carnal wound; and this ulceration is made in the preceding trauma of the auricle which does not consent to healing, and some evacuated ulcers are on the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the preceding trauma of it, which does not consent to healing, is in the major dispositions of difficult sanitation.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which follows, you should pause the auricle of the patient towards the sun and regard it in that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if an apparent suppuration occurs, observe carefully with a subtle spatula the form of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it is where the latitude is small, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatula should be of two gentle lengths so that it does not cause harm to the auricle.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And then if the ulceration is born from flesh in the auricle or in its flesh, then you should make subtle incisions and vigorously facilitate entry so that all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the ulceration is in the preceding trauma of the auricle, then take a subtle razor and scalpel that place with a small focus, and then put it in the flesh of the auricle.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And then if you have sensed suppuration in that which the patient's atrophy has facilitated, due to the gravity of absorption, it forces the oppression of it to be facilitated; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the auricle.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on the auricle, drap it with linen according to the quantity of the width of the bandage which you have enveloped in Egyptian unguent; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a bowl and pulverize over the bandage and use it to anoint; and if the auricle is about to be apostemated, then beware that you extract the water and permute it with another water which you have enveloped in cerate so that it is done with roasted oil, until it is apostemic caution; and then cure it until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Moreover, if a flow of blood occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and pause it on the auricle, and use another cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is stated in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of athelia which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athelia which occurs in the eyelids of some eyes is humid, some evacuated ulcers are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then beware that you hold those with tenacious or pointed nails, and sharpen them to the root of their roots, and then pause on the affected places thoroughly.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Moreover, if pain with a flow of blood comes, then you should cauterize those with a subtle lancet-like cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to pause on the incisions and too evacuated ulcers that return when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized in focus, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of cataracts that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Some evacuated motes dwell in the eyelids of the eyes for some cause which is assembled to grandeur in its strength and hardness, and thus grandeur is appealed.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of gross humidity in the upper eyelid and underneath.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation on them is that you consider then if the grandeur is proceeding in it from what appears of the eyelid and is magnified to the whole part; and the cause of it is lassitude.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make a fissure above it for the width, and then scrape it from the whole part to facilitate evacuation, and then suspend it with a pointed instrument and absolve it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Moreover, if you have not prepared the incision of it, then do not push so that it penetrates the eyelid with an incision little by little, then that will not be noticed in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that because the unction of it restores and incarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the grandeur is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid, then you will evacuate the eyelid and suspend the grandeur with a pointed instrument, unless you indicate an incision, and prepare it from the whole part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, that will not be noticed in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the treatment, wash the wound with salt water; and take care of the area where the disease is entrenched so that it may be healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the treatment of abscesses under the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Abscesses are grayish in color which are generated in the membranes of the eyelid, and they increase especially in children, aggravate the eyes of those who have them, and cause them to avoid the brightness of the sun because of the pain that is felt by them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason you will often see them shading their eyes all the time, and sleeping with their eyelids half-closed, which have been covered in inflammation, and there is a threat of apparent aggravation in the eye; and when you press on the area around the veins, you feel the aggravation entering into it.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some manner of operation is in that which the patient pauses his evil humor in the vein, and then pause to draw off the fluid and of the hot circle, according to the quantity it contains of arthritic matter from the whole affected part, and then pause to apply it to the area and press on the veins of the entire circumference, and then finish in the middle of that humidity at a certain point incident in the fissure, and the fissure is not larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	You will find in the preceding chapter that you should insert the entire code into the vein so that you may reach the arthritis, because in the most disposed processes arthritis proceeds through a fissure according to the form of white crust.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that humor with the fluids which you have enveloped between the veins of the affected parts beforehand and revolve it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to touch the fissure so that the fluid does not reach the eye and descends into it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if the arthritis does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then you should adjust in the fissure a small facilitated humor until it processes the arthritis; and then extract that humor as we have said; and then submerge the fluids in water and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those humors with poultices.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then it is necessary to filter salt and pause it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity may be absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if there are aposteme abscesses in the area, then treat them with emplasters of cedar until they are healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	About methods of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When on the eyelids of the eyes there are natural and ancient adjustments, then those who have them in their eyes and become accustomed to ways of evil and thus cum lacrimal fluids and mollification of the eyelids and web, until that becomes a cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye, and it can be treated in four ways: either by cautery with a focus; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries; or it is done by touching with an incision and suture; or with canes as you have already heard.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then it is necessary that you pause the evil humor in the vein; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, good; and otherwise, insert a needle in the area where there is faithfulness of the affected part below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate into the faithfulness above, and that is — near the edge of the eyelid where the natural adjustments are — near the adjustments, and pull out the faithfulness to the upper parts above the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then finish in the affected part within the eyelid below the natural adjustments with an incident fluid of the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and then extract the faithfulness and pause beneath the eyelid small poultices of cotton or cloth, and then place a thread over the eyelid in a tent-like shape, and it is thus like the figure of a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because that has been diversified in men, because of those who are born with a great quantity of faithfulness from the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then finish with the fluid over the two lines which have been marked, and beginning from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near the natural adjustments thus like the large tumor of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the ounce in one of the two angles of the code, and then excoriate that entire thing, and then adjust with a subtle thread the two labia with wool or faithfulness of wool, and absorb the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the faithfulness over the two eyelids for some visionary causes, if you want to do that, and otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the stitches on the wounds for three or four days, and then take care to remove them.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you want, leave the wound with its stitches, and take care that it dries and strengthens, because the swelling is lifted from the sign of the wound and its aggravation; a better stitch is thus achieved. And so you will then dismiss the ancients' taxes.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Greater emperor's advice is sought regarding the patient, and it is of good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manner in taxation, and it is that you place on the swollen figure thus as fuel of mirty, and then elevate the swelling by three separated and gathered inches according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do so, take the inches, and that which is not swallowed, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other end near the larger lacrimal duct, and the end according to the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between the two ties of the threads equally, and then elevate your hand in elevation, elevating the entire code above which there is a sign thus as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound to stitching, and take care that it enters so that it may be healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if there is an abscess from your incision or your fracture, then that abscess is to be cleaned and it seems similar, and it is purified.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some veiled intentions are hidden in the swelling that the wise men have converted, therefore you should use them in that which we have said of incision; but stitching is sometimes more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	The ancients' taxes follow according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the swelling and divide the figure which is defined according to what has been recounted; and then for art, make two channels or two subtle stars of which the longitude is according to the longitude of the swelling and the latitude of theirs is smaller than the latitude of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some subtlety under that which superfluously flows from the swelling of the vein, and constrict the channels of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and leave it like that for several days, because the code for the strict structure will be denied and it will be forgotten until you can put it back in place.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut the vein with the scalpels, and then take care of the wound until it is healthy.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is consolidated, the swelling is elevated and the skin does not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method of making two channels which you will do according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it has the quantity of longitude and latitude neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of stinging skin in the vein with a needle when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and stinging the veins, then the operation on it is that you take a subtle needle and pause in that thin thread of silk and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move subtly in some manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And it is the longitude of the threads of a quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you will compose another subtle thread below it in brief, and adjust the extremities of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then stop the patient's bad humor in the tie, and it is proper of the sun for your work to be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has need of ingenuity, and make it penetrate the swelling firmly until you extract it from under the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin until underneath and introduce it into the alloy, and be the skin one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand until the skin is forged in the alloy in the swelling with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is not forged in the alloy and the skin is not joined, you will forge the alloy to the parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until the alloy is joined from the upper trauma.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And look at that in the vision of the vein, because then you will forge the alloy and the thread, and grasp something and close the vein, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its own place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a long skin of natural skins, and it is elevated in that, or that which is left until it is lengthened properly in some space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of evacuating the humor which is seen in the swelling beneath.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the veins are inflamed in the eyelid, and it is opposed to the contraction of the eyebrow when it contracts inward, either on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the wound or from scarring or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this inflammation is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of the wound or from scarring or cauterization, or for the resemblance to their bad circulation.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Perhaps the manner of operation in this case is that you perform that consolidation and separate the lips from it, and pause there where it is between them a kind of layer of dressing, and tie them together so they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not cover that you use for the cure of it from the causes which are external, constraining; because if you do so returns to inflammation worse than never having had healing.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that case the causes which mollify thus with fenugrec, and immerse it in the water in which there are mixed altaea and essence of it, or enguient dy aquilon, which is liquefied in some of the oils, and submerge it in that mixture, and cure it in that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all together so that nothing remains unconsolidated according to the form that was established at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described is not but a certain rectification of the inflammation that does not return the form of the place according to what was previously.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the cure of inflammation which is made in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This inflammation which is made in the eyelid below, which is naturally called vertadierament inflammation; and it is either a natural one or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental ones are caused by wounds or by scars or by cauterization or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation for it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates into both extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into a spacious spatulum.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if it returns to the figure of the eyelid as it should be; otherwise, take the thread and pause it in the figured fold, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And they are the extremities of the two fissures at two angles of the incision, which was made until they converge, and it is from their made angle until when they gather together it forms the figure of them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then lift the flesh there for the quantity that is the size of the lower part of it, which closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with the thread of flax; and then cure them with what we have said about the mollifying medicines and poultices until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the inflammation ends up with a fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is fitting that you make a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been preceded.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the cure of inflammation whether it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of inflammation, and that is in various diverse forms.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skillful artists always prepare everything in any manner possible to return the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and that malady according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many homes in this way that the eyelid is solidified above the album of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, therefore it is fitting that you insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it in its own, or stretch it with the hook.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion into a subtle spatulum, which is not acute from the incisions, having obtained a small perforation so that the malady is not disturbed during the operation, and remain with the spatulum that does not lead the eye to its acuity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And it is your incision that excises that adhesion in facility until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the eye salt water in which you wash; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of it, and pause over the eye a flaxen infusion in an album of wool, and then use three days of causes consolidatives until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	About the incision of a nail and the prominence of flesh in the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that a nail is according to two manners, because it is either nervous, and appears like a hard, subtle cyst; or it is non-nervous, appearing as white, congealed humidity, which when you touch it, or try to take hold of it, it is cut off and the onychia (nail disease) does not fix itself in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin except from the major tear duct, where it goes little by little, covering the vision and hindering the light and movement of the wheel.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to operate in the incision of it is that the patient holds their head back, and you operate on the wheels of it, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail from the little duplication and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and introduce it into the horse's hair or ox hair or vaqua hair, or similar, or strong wire, or duplicate the extremity of the little needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it to the nail; and extend it to the upper parts, and extract the skin around the nail which closes the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will follow it into the skin towards the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you will incise the rhizome in the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and remove the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by incising it, you do not induce continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is on the sole of the foot extended or strong, thus we have said, and then it must be excavated with a lion's spatula, of which this is the form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the spatula and that it does not rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then make an incision in the wheel with a little of salty triturated powder or of clear fig-tree sap, and let it be until another day; and then take care that it is covered so that it may be healthy.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, nor is it fixed in that onychia, then many remedies are applied to this type of nail, and it is healed thus, as I have written and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then you operate on the wheel of the patient and take a subtle lion's spatula of sharp, acute edge according to this form.
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rarified and congealed and takes hold in that root, then distill from your work in the wheel of clear fig-tree sap or with clear rog or salty triturated powder, and apply the wheel until another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over that operation until it is completely removed, so that nothing of it remains, unless the contrary happens and an abscess forms in the wheel, because then you will leave it, and take care at the beginning to form the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate your operation on that root until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the tear flesh, if you notice it in the wheel for great annoyance, is suspended on the onychia; and incise it from that one part, and do not ultimate the incision so that you do not induce flows of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill in the tear duct clear rog and fig-tree sap until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the incision of gangrenous and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the wheel.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some remedies in the wheels of some are born from red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the upper parts before and is assembled like a bouquet of flowers.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in it is that the patient holds their head back; and then operate on the wheels of it and collect all that flesh in convenient onychia, and you have a forcep or a chest; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wheel that does not leave that which deviates from your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And it is your incision in which you will incise those or with the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps that are collected as it seems according to the form of it, as we will find in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then when your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wheel with salty triturated powder, or distill in it a red powdered sap and similar to the corrosive medicines, and put over the wheel before a crust forms from the matter of the wheel until it is assured against abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is some reason for the inflammation and it is seen that the patient has a hot apostema, then take away the bad humor and cure that apostema in a way that it ceases to be an apostema, and apply it to the area of operation until it is sanitized, and similarly make an adjustment to the flesh which is affected by this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Perhaps you will find that complete healing of the bad humor occurs naturally or accidentally, avoiding iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently affected by that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	The collection of sweat from the body.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sweat that comes out rough and is tested on the body and prohibits its operation, and reveals the body in length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the body in which the sweat is strong and there is no other bad humor than sweat, then you collect that sweat.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place their ill head in the following manner, and suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and let that inch be of subtle duplication according to this form.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two inches gradually in a hollow according to this form.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and absorb the healthy hour at that hour, until you see those veins being cleansed of the body and being revolved.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not lead the body to the extremities of the spatium; and if your operation is in the middle of the day, under the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not insert except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then distill in the body clear green or red liquid because it is acute corrosion that is cleansed of sweat.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Perhaps if it is not possible for you to collect all at that hour, then apply a poultice with all that cures the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is calmed and assured against hot apostema.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And apply it to him according to the manner of the material until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the prescriptions:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of aristocratic nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat aristocratic nose with cautery or sharp medicine burning according to the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not generated in it except that you operate on the apostema until the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is discovered and you find in it corruption or blackness, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called an asp head, and it is made of iron indeed, and the head is rounded thus as to pierce which is made pointed by pointing of file or whetstone for subtle pointing (thus as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And stop that on the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolve it between the fingers of the hands, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then make some evacuations, and then restore the place with desiccative and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the place is consolidated and it is in good flesh born and the body is freed from the sane and Roman for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostematized and does not happen by accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, then it is not in the generation except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you discover from following bone or sharp medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three tribulations according to this form.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	It is the external triangle of the iron, and the handle of it should be first extended until the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then stop that on the bone, and it is that prop of the lacrimal; and hold your hand a little from the body, and then revolve your hand with the tribulation until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels for as long as it takes to remove the bad humor and for as long as it takes to come out by itself.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore then restore the place with styptic medicines that dry thus as you are expert in it.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and the place are indurated, then the matter which was poured out to the deformed parts returns to the nose, therefore it is possible to lift it above the bad humor.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the body.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the body emerges in its entirety and does not suffer from vezzing nor diminution, then you find that the bad humor is relaxed, and then it follows, and then you stop ventoses on the cervical scarifications and suck for good suction; and then stop on the body with liniment made of acatra and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the poultice on the body with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of treating the pulse is to take three drops of the strongest lion's milk, and each drop should be divided into four places; do so with those strongest.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then pause on each one over the other according to the quantity that the patient has needed.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then stretch over those I will give a strong structure; and afterwards apply cups with suction to scarify the area; then remove the cups and let the patient's skin be straight day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Perhaps meanwhile the ligament is softened, then it is good that it should be most straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient is not reduced, well, then, afterwards apply the plaster to the pulse and the structure and the cups until they are healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the inflammation of the prominence of the tunicate vein.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When disruption occurs in the tunicate vein, and it becomes prominent and proceeds outward towards the eyelids like a grain of radish, and its shape is that of a man for this purpose, and you want to make an incision, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the vein of the lower part below, and then place the other needle in the double fold of the lacrimal area, and let it penetrate and remove the first needle according to its disposition; and then make an incision at the site of the double fold and lift it up to that part of the vein in the circle of the needle, and stretch it strongly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then extract the needle and pause on the patient's lane infused with water of egg white, and let it be until the thread is in the vein.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then take care of the patient with what comforts them until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some vegetables gathered from the whole area in a circle of three drops until the patient adjusts to great prominence, and then it should be perforated with a subtle spatula that goes to the peritoneum of the patient, and correct the albugineous humidity, and descend the patient and enter as soon as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until they are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This bad ulcer that is called alconati is not but a sane one which is adjusted in the patient similar to descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Perhaps the manner of operating on it is to make the ulcer sit above the prepared seat and straighten, and then take the dry cap in the two most tender parts and mauve until you see the sane part pervading downwards, and then it should be dried and not descend, and the light should be obscured, and the ulcer sees the causes as it was before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	Perhaps if it is not prepared for the descent to the sane part with water as we have said, then make the ulcer sit between the two most tender parts and take a subtle spatula and fenestra above the panniculus, circling a small devision of the continuity of the conjunctiva in the corneal tunic in the crown (at the site of the vein), until the sane part is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then since it is forgotten, then you distill on the patient water heated in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated for the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22. (Note: It seems that the text has ended, and there are no more chapters to translate.)
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending water from the patient.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have said the species of water in the division and what is convenient to declare openly, then that according to sanity.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is good that you make the ulcer sit between the two most tender parts above a warm tile and bind the patient's hand strongly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then pause near the eyelid of the patient's hand on the left side, if the patient is on the left; or on the right side, if the patient is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take with your right hand the almond, if the patient is on the left; or with your left hand, if the patient is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then pause the extremity of the almond near the crown for the greatness of the vein in the white of the patient's eye on the part of the least lacrimal, and then peel the almond in a circle and turn your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the patient's eye and feel that the almond has already been introduced to the cause of the vein.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is good that the measurement of the path of the almond at the point of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the patient's eye; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the patient through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then pause the almond at the site where the water is, and then you will attract it downwards another time, and so if the water descends soon, then see the ulcer above which the patient has lost their sight soon, and the almond in the patient's eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And you should rest for a little while; then if the water has descended, afterwards you put aside that other wetness before it mixes with the pus.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And so when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the pus easily, and turn your hand little by little, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and apply that warm liquid to the dent; and place outside the warm cloth or stoppage or wool infused with oil of roses and album of wolf and ligature around that warmth.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Maybe we, those who are from our time, place above that wound a dressing made with album of wolf's [balm].
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not observe your pus entering the wound through its hardness — because it is a sign of the men who have the wound that is very hard —, then gather the spatula which is called scraper of the one that is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce through that conjunction, and do not push your hand in the wound, and it is not so that you make a way to the pus in the subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then we enter the pus according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete the preparation of your work, prepare the patient's bedroom decently made in which they sleep on their back with two pillows in a darkened room, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature is purified, and do not move your head to the right side or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And be the treatment according to its disposition until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then dislodge that in that darkened room and expose the fresh air, and do see some causes, and then return the treatment until the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not gather that you make water during the hours of the remedies or almost then apply the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having gathered that you remove water for thus because the water can flow gently and abundantly with great and vehement regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Maybe you will find a cautious abscess, then gather that you dislodge the wound within seven days, and correct that with water that falls from the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you absolve the sight of it and pause over the face of its orifice for which the governance of the evacuation is done in a few days, existing in the darkened room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it will be gradually evacuated from that darkened room and converted into its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in the case it is not excused, the disciple of vision sees some visions, and then you are ready about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now it has come to us from some of those who are at the Artach, and some said that they made fire in the Ayroc magnetized perforated with which the water is succeeded.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Perhaps emperor, you have not seen anything in our land which has perfected water, nor is it legitimate in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magnetized water, so that it is above those which ignore those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or of iron properly, and they are the extremities of their love in this subtle triangularity, the acute extremity thus as it is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths adjusted from which some cause is assembled to scorpion of many feet, or to a polyp foot; and this illness is called polyp because it is similar to that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of it is that it is not lion's flesh of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that which is in these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, gather that you make the patient sit between your hands and place him in the sun, and open the nostrils of it, and prick the tendon once in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the previous parts beforehand, and then inject water that you have comprehended of those with a subtle spatula of one part until you know that all the flesh is restored; that if it remains of it some cause for which the abscess is possible, then you prepare water with one of the subtle instruments facilitated until it is removed from any cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Maybe you will find a cautious abscess, then you pause at the water that gathers; or it is of the malignant apostemes, then you touch and cauterize it until it is absolved healthy and all the cavities are restored.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then it will be purified in the nose, then inject with agreement of water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Maybe the nose is opened and from it proceeds humidity to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Maybe the humidity does not penetrate as it gathers, then you know that the dent is flesh in the purulent bones of the nostrils which have not undergone abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, it is necessary that the doctor feel with his hand the thickening of the limb at the place where there may be some swelling, and not to touch excessively the tender spots, and pause between each spot to assess the quantity of pain or discomfort, and examine the patient and insert a finger into the nostrils in order to detect if there is any abnormality in the flow of air or for some other reason.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then it is necessary to make an effort, that the doctor's attention penetrates into the nostrils through which the air reaches the canals of the nose, and he sits on the patient's bed, because too many times it seems similar to this action in schools, and it is a lighter cause for those who do not want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the limb, one extremity that is placed on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a gentle pressure with flesh on the nails that are on the limb, and make an effort to know if the flesh is already on the nails of the limb.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the limb, and pause at the nose to abstract the blood flow with a cooling treatment, and make an effort for three days or more until the inflamed area is completely cleansed of all that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, pause at the nose with a tube of lead for several hours until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	There are many ways to cure this disease, but I will describe one of them that is effective.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument called cupping, which makes the patient's blood distilled into oils and medicines in the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make one of silver or copper, which is similar to a small, covered lamp, thus like a small container, and the material is similarly shaped.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the handle of the cupping instrument is flat, uncovered; which is manipulated at the back of it, with which you hold that which you extract from the oil or what you want of the juices and causes that are sucked.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this cupping is precious: a recipe of infusions of castor, white birthwort, ginger, and pills of saffron, of long pepper, of scrubbing, of petum of spicy an ounce. You collect the juice of beet and of cabbage, and make them into pills, and dissolve a pill in warm water, and gargle with it through the nostrils of the patient who is lying on his back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the veins that are born in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it is born in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned for several days until when a motion is felt regarding it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason it is necessary that you write down what appears at the beginning of its appearance, and erase all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause on the spot where the cautery or burning medicine is, which was placed on the spot of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	There are many delayed infections until it is magnified, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron because it is an aposteme of cancer; because many times it happens to those who write down this infection in the great malice over that which they had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of a tender touch and not of dark color, and sometimes writing down is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and write down without fear, and cure the spot with what cures and constrains until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About the stitching of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by similar things.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when you apply a solution of continuity to one of these cartilages, few confer with each other in that operation unless in some homes.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, it is necessary, when you come across some cause of those, to consider if it is fresh plague with holy blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with stitching, and then cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you excavate each part of its apparent code until nothing remains unhealed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with stitching and strengthen them, and upon those sprinkle holy dragon's powder and let it sit for three days or for four, and place on the powder a piece of emplaustra diafinicon, or some other of the consolidating emplasters, and leave that like that for two days or for three, and then remove that and change that emplaster and leave that until the limbs are absolved, and then cure with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	There are many ways to stitch that you add the solution of continuity or with threads like we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity to the limb like I have done and made known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come into the two lips in the divided parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Removed fat is found in the divided parts of their lips, which appear as hard, grass-like errings, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then you should convert the lips and remove each of those hardnesses from every part, and afterwards make an incision to release the trapped blood, and then wash with warm water and clean the area where it is stipulated, so that it may be sanctified.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A great deal of fat grows over the adjusted flesh in the gums, which the ancients called albumen, therefore you should suspend that accumulation or hold it back with a forceps and incise it to remove its root, and let the healthy blood flow or the healthy blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply a poultice over the area where it is stipulated, or other powders that are stimulative or excitative.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About the reason for teeth that are iron-hard.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and those of the forehead and between the adjusted gums, there are rough, scaly, and blackened deposits, and some fatty ones are greenish or vertiginous until the gum is corrupted by that decay and the loose teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then you should make a separation between the patient's hands and place their head on a towel, and scrape the teeth on which those rough deposits appear, and causes seem like sand until none of them remain, and that is done to remove blackness and greenishness and other defects so that they may be mondified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if that is the start of the reasoning, well; and if not, then you iterate the reasoning over those others on another day and on the second and third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that teeth have needed various forms of roots and figures according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And thus because the roots are those which the tooth is rooted in the divided part, it is different from the roots which are ras between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots are prepared by you, which will be seen soon.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	About the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should cure the tooth of its pain with entire understanding and delay in the entire eradication of it, because there is no cause that supplies the fatness of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance until it is excavated in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Moreover, you should be certain when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, because firmly you must be certified which tooth is painful, because many fatnesses of pain deceive the patient and make it seem like it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, because we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then how can you be certain which tooth is painful, and what do you know, then you should scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatulum in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of the entire part, and then you have mauled those teeth with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concurs.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then you should place something in the strong teeth with good speech or strong estoupe, and pause the head of the patient between the teeth that you hold so that they do not bite, and then draw the tooth according to rectitude in many ways so that it does not tremble, nor does the patient have major pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it beneath the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then you should complete the drawing of that trauma and strengthen it with a subtle extremity of root for so that it is not trapped in the hour of your construction over those teeth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should operate extremely carefully in the scarification of the entire circuit of the gum and guard much your strength so that it does not tremble and remain divided from it, and return to the patient for the evil that is greater than the primary pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity over the eradication of them, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many fatnesses come over the bad homes with great difficulties that are more trapped, and their roots are entirely removed, or some of those, or that you extract those from the mandible also as many fatnesses have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then apply eradication of his saliva by washing the mouth with hot or cold salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if you induce flows of blood for a while, thus with motivated evacuations, then apply some quantity of powder and aspersion on the wound, and if that powder doesn't work, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps should be subtle and fine as those that are suitable for extracting teeth at the beginning, with a short handle and large, so that they do not become dull when one needs to operate.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be like times of large handles that enter so that when you stretch them out they do not become dull, but rather brief extractions.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of iron from India, expertly crafted for brief extractions, and in the extractions of those there are teeth like the ones that enter into each other and stretch out by strong constriction, and sometimes evacuations of those are in the shape of a bird's beak which is called ciconia, so it is guaranteed, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from crushed jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate teeth which are broken for some reason, then it is necessary that you apply pressure on the affected area with a bandage for a day or two until the area becomes mollified; and then insert gently or take out the extractions with which they are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia or guarantee, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extractions of those are made of dentine, thus like lime or alum.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey you in this way with these forceps or instruments, then it is necessary that you operate on the root and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called atali, so it is a small lever whose shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be of brief extraction, thick and small, and not be bent so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the root is not extracted, well; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extraction in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have subtle extractions.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus you will be helped with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form suitable for the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the root of teeth; because juice flows out with this instrument which is assembled on a large hook, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extraction twisted or curved, which has some thickness, and not bent so that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing is that the instruments for teeth are moved thus and similarly to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled artisans are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to themselves according to what they mean by operation and diverse ailments; because they are among the ailments which the ancients did not diagnose nor pause for proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	More, if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are broken, or if they are rotten, then it is necessary to cure above that in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have spoken about in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be with some small thickness little by little, and let it be held or tied in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is fully extracted; and then restore the place with suitable medicines according to what is convenient.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More, if there is small rottenness in the bone, then remove that from the rottenness and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the cure of teeth prominent above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course in that form is lagging, and especially when they induce in women, and especially in venerable elderly people; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is nothing like another tooth, and it is not possible to straighten or align it, then root out that one; more that it is not joined to another tooth, then you separate it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a morr of pork, and let it be made of Indian iron of extruded sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be in which you separate it in three days for the duration of the tooth, and that it is not joined to another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file it with a file of Indian iron of which this is the form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of Indian iron and the margin is ornamented; and let it be of many minute points thus like a file in which they are made agulhas, in which the tooth is filed little by little in many days with facilitation, so that it is not another tooth joined and fixed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then apply those lines on the forehead, and scratch it there with rough rasps.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a part of the tongue is tied and the lines are led, then it is necessary that you remove what has been taken from that fraction, and it should be applied so that the tongue does not slip away nor the speech becomes corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	About the restoration of fallen teeth with gold foil or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth fall out due to concussion and removal through percussion or causation, and the patient cannot hold on to what they are eating, and you have treated them with medicines that stop the flow, and your treatment has not been effective, then it is so that they do not generate evil humors in those strengthened with gold foil and not with silver, because silver turns greenish and then puts itself aside after several days, but gold at no time becomes muddy.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And it is the foil in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the method of reception is that you take the foil and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with the twisted shape of the foil between two fallen teeth, or one or more, until it reaches the fabric on the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then iterate the treatment until the part where you started, and hold your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not fallen.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And it is your diligence that holds the foil away from the roots of the teeth so they do not become loose.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then remove the superfluous foil extremities with forceps or tweezers, and add those to whatever place you have handled, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the fallen tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave it like that, straight as the Romans do.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	Moreover, if it is dislocated or broken, hold it or them with another foil in such a manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two fallen teeth, thus as I have linked them:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their place, and they are recut like I have recommended, and they remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not do that without good artisans and knowledge.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some ivory is apt for a certain cause of the cow's bones, and it is made like their form of tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened thus as I have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the incision of the ligament that grows in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that grows beneath the tongue sometimes has ivory or is natural in which men are born, or it is accidental and happens through a wound that has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth, the existing head being in the tender skin; and elevate the tongue, and then incise that nervous ligament according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retention.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	Moreover, if there is some hardness or induration, and that has been stagnant for consolidation of the wound, then you inject oil and separate it along the latitude until you have incised the ligament and the induration is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not made a fissure in the skin of the flesh and that you separate here, lest you cause an influx of bloody flux.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remains of the incision with warm water or wine or cold water; and then pause beneath the tongue, licini; thus it is customary to hold the patient's tongue beneath the tongue at any time so that another growth does not consolidate.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Moreover, if there is a flow of blood, pause over the vitriolated place three times; if the blood stops, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is convenient for that.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it in other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	About the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some ivory grows beneath the tongue, an aposteme resembling a small pearl preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth, seated in front of the window and consider the aposteme.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onci in it, and incise with a subtle spatula, and incise the entire part; and if blood stops during your operation, then you pause for three hours, thus it is vitriolated, until the bleeding is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And you return to your work within, so that you have treated them completely, so that they are washed in a warm and healthy manner; and take care of the other treatment in order to be fully healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles and from that which is nothing in the gullet and from other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you find a tumor in the gullet, it is glands that are assembled there, which quickly accumulate and are named two auricles, which when you treat them, if they have not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron for the flow of blood; but first let it mature, and then you will operate on it, or it will rupture by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, radish-like, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is what you consider, during your operation, if you have already rested the abscess with a complete rest or if it has diminished with some diminution; and then make a section in the patient's sole, and the head of it should be in the thigh, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between their hands before the tongue of it, holding an instrument most noble whose form is this.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or copper, and let it be subtle as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press it against the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and you cut above it with the thigh immediately, then take hold of it and place it in the amulet, and pull it towards the divided parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another thing that you pull out some cause from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled to forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of them is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is of iron indeed, well-cooked.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: Let it be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one vein, incise the other according to this same method of incision, and then wash the patient's gurgling mouth with fresh water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of sage or of mint leaves and similarly to that of the stiping causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then take care of it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some vegetations grow in the gullet besides other abscesses like those two auricles, and incise them according to what you have said about the incision of two veins previously.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already medicated a woman with an abscess which was born in her gullet, the abscess tended to dark color, with little sensation, which had closed her gullet, and the woman breathed with great difficulty, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was near death if it had not been treated for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had so grown that it had formed two ramps until they burst through two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then you carefully dissected it and placed it in one of its holes, and pulled it out, and extracted from the large portion, and then you incised that which comprehends the other tract, and then you opened its mouth, and comprehended its tongue, and then you placed the hole in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you removed a large part of it, and there was no flow from it except for a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the gullet of that woman was absolutely cleared, and soon she began to drink water, and then she started to eat, so you no longer needed to incise that abscess many times per day, and successfully removed the abscess from its place, which was prolonged until it was healed.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you healed it and cauterized the gullet of it, then stopped the addiction; and then you walked and did not know that God did that miracle.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 38.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a tumor when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the tumor grows on the skin, and it is abscessed and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a thick and round part, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and you do not contradict your cure, and sometimes it happens that the abscess has remained subtle, then it needs to be incised which are aggregated round; and if it is of long duration, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in its center, then it needs to be operated on, because in this case there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you sometimes follow the method by which you have decided to open the white and long vein of the patient, so that you make the patient's tongue protrude and press the instrument on it, which processes its shape and then places the nail in the new moon, and pulls it down and inscribes it with one of the two instruments, which are marked on the inscription of two fingers.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware that you do not inscribe it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term of its additions, because if you inscribe it more, you will disturb the liquid speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the inscription, use that which we have recommended in the inscription of two fingers, and cure it within so that it may be healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the inscription of it, beware that you use gentle handling in the cauterization of its fear, and the manner of the cautery is not but a sharp point, and it is that you place the head of the patient in the tender spot, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have stated in the chapter on cauterization, and make it alive, and pause that it does not spread nor become subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument with this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	It is the extraction of the hernia in which the medicine was placed as well as the hernia of a golden rod, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient will spit over the shoulder for so that corroding saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one does not obstruct the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not hinder any cause on the throat of it and that it descends to that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it will be diminished and calmed by the absorption of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take cotton and envelop it around the extremity of the rod, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the rod with the cotton into a canal above so that the cotton adheres to it, and do this as many times until you obtain what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then the cauterization will be more effective in the circuit of the grape with cotton wrapped around the border, and notify that which is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and it will be washed with fresh water, and it will be cured beforehand by embrocation, and it will be freed from gargling until it is healthy.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of cure is more saving than inscription and more lengthy in fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounded uvulas are cured with that which is more subtle than cautery and inscription, because it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of their, in a bowl, and they are submerged in vinegar agreeably, and boiling; and the bowl should be covered decently, and it should be in the middle location of the bowl a truce, on which is placed an instrument conquered by silver or copper according to this manner; it is made of silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth so that the vapor reaches the uvula above the canal, so that the uvula is not too obstructed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then iterate over those many wounded places until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the time of the coming of abscesses, because it would too much adjust in the abscess, and do not think that you are doing this, but rather declare the abscess of the cautious doctor.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if it is not present to you with this instrument, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of it in a closed house, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closed house of the cane prohibits the vapor from entering the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres to the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many wounded places adhering to the throat or thorn of feet or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then beware that you extract that which is apparent from those, upon which the sight falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is occult in the throat, beware that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the throat will be forced out by vomiting; or give the patient a piece of nap or radish of lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dry marine sponge, and bind it strongly with faith, and then transpose the patient across this, so that when you perceive the place in which the thorns are extracted, then it is forced out.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Take a small animal and bind it well, and place it on the table and let its essence be extracted; or take a porridge and let its juices flow through the affected part.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Maybe it is not forgotten how those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it is better to use a large one than a small one, and in the extremity of it you will find the conduit that you insert into its throat to facilitate.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the ague has its head elevated in them, and beware that the touch of the ague's bone is on the throat, so that it does not descend into the body and it does not pierce the bone or the spine, or that the doctor places his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Maybe it is better that the patient inserts himself, by his own knowledge of the place of the adjacent cause and pierces himself, and draws his hand along with the instrument in them, as much as possible according to the quantity which has been prepared beforehand so that it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood from the adjacent area to the gout.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When bloodletting is medicated with the aforementioned remedies and not comforters, consider then the gout of the patient in solitude, since you have comprehended the language of the instrument which I have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you want to perform bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle and decent gestures.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout of the patient, and place a ignited iron in the cavity of the cannula, and do so many times (until the bloodletting is dead and separated from the gout) and abstain from giving the patient water for a whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of cold water, and put the patient's mouth in it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not transgress from this rule for any cause and avoid giving water for an hour, then give it to him by hand, because the bloodletting is so sensitive that it feels the cold water like a cat.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Maybe it is not forgotten that which we have recommended, then suffumigate the patient with cimetic or asafoetida through the instrument which we have recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do it thus, since it is four times a year.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another manner of operating in the suffumigation of this, that you take a vessel in which are ignited coals and the vessel is covered with a covering in the middle of which is a tube; and place it beneath the suffumigation; and pause to put the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has penetrated to the bloodletting, because the bloodletting is very sensitive.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't work, then you repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient drink, and eat salty and healthy foods, and don't ask for water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen is not forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which gout of the joints is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it is in some curved shape:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the gout, and its extremity is similar to the beak of a stork, which is hollow, in which there is applied a file, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of their.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the remembrance of them, in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and section of them for two manners, one of which is for the species of abscesses in their metrics; and for that which is comprehended from the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is proper for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs on the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy place occurs differently from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each one of them is judged according to operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And many abscesses are such that they cover that they are not perforated but rather mature with the sap of those or complement them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other abscesses cover that they are traversed when they are crucified, and do not mature according to their complement, just like abscesses that are properly placed in the joints, because an abscess that is properly joined to a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can corrode the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess of principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, it will not harm the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, then perforate what has not matured; and do not cover that they perforate cruely, from non-completed digestion, but only that which is near the buttocks, so that you do not feel the pain of it and it becomes elongated to the internal parts of the buttocks, and makes a fistula, or it is made in the term of it that it does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You should know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it matures.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You know it has matured when the cessation of pain and the reduction of fever occur, and then there is a decrease in rigor and pulse, and the acute phase of the abscess's head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you know that the perforation will occur in the place where pus is beneath the abscess and from which pus comes out for the urgency of the treatment.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And perforation often occurs through the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the partitions of the muscles or feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerve cords, of the arteries; and, finally, in all swollen places where there is no reflection; because in those that do reflect, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to delay perforation until digestion is confirmed according to the compliment, as we have said; because if you perforate at that time, it prolongs the body of the pus and causes much putridity, and strengthens the lips of the abscess so they are indurated and deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Some abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or body that needs treatment, or according to the quality of the member that is injured.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you know that you should administer small perforation, and in large abscesses a large or ample perforation, or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses are those in which you know that the codena (codename for a medical term?) is conquered and enclosed, when it is made thus and it is in term that already stagnates, thus as that which accumulates in drops of dubellum and of buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus as the figure of a leaf of myrtle, thus as the abscesses of the anginas.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similarly to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	When that which is not able thus as the superficial abscesses of Lions, you know that you should perforate with a superficial perforation, or a plain one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And you know that when the abscess is large and has collected much sane matter, you should perforate it and not be afraid to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a part from it, and then you should open the abscess again another day, and then extract a larger part, and then make many evacuated matters according to gradual evacuation until it is fully purged.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of fragile virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old decrepit person, because the animal spirit is much resolved to evacuate the sane matter, and strengthens the death of the patient, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	You should keep this chapter with great caution, and then make your perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, knowing that you will sterilize the wounds and consider therefore if the wound of the abscess is small, or is a plain section, then you administer the qualifications of oil or of antidote; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you know that you should pause in whatever tract until they come together again.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the codena (codename for a medical term?) has been cut off or has concaved in the circuit, then you know that you should complete it with much oil or with a fayt thread of drap from oil, thus as when you have treated pans or razizos, their humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then process it and cure what you know of the enguents until it is sanitized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	When you accumulate flux of blood at the time of your operation, then you administer fresh water and wine in those which mix a thread of oil, and pause that over the place of the fluxes of the blood, many evacuated matters.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	When you preserve the fluxes of blood, then you know that you should administer regimen and cure and powder those which have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	When it is winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you know that you should apply poultices in wine and oil, and pause those over the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the places are fleshy, then you know that you should pause poultices wrapped in water and oil or wine and oil, and all that should be fresh until the third day, as we have said, and then you know that you should dissolve the abscess and sterilize it and administer in its cure what is convenient for it to be sanitized.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus it is necessary to know the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction already said about each abscess in which manner it is possible to cure it by chapters separately.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41. (assuming the text starts a new chapter)
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	The separation of abscesses which come in the hollow of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the hollow of the small head abscesses, and it is of special knots which contain tunics that are at their own doing; and the species of them are very moved.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them are swellings, and of those which contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those which contain moisture similar to poultices, and they resemble them; and of those which are lumpy, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the separation of everything, and in the extraction of those which is not fear, as one should not make the extraction of those which do not cause contradictory bitterness.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in separation of those is that you should prepare those with an instrument in the form of which you approach thus, which is called entromes, until you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if it contains moisture, then separate it from the separation according to its longitude for superficial separation according to this form.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the separation of the line .B. until the line .G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, then you excoriate it because it contains that moisture, and do not leave any of it for any cause whatsoever, because many vigorous returns come back, if not from some other cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge it in Egyptian inguent, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that plague and leave it there until another day, because I think that corrosion occurs to all that is removed from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply it again on that spot with Egyptian inguent secondly and thirdly if you notice any signs of it, until you are confident that there is no other cause from that skin; then cure the plague with inguent until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	in the separation having form of a cross, and cut between two lips of the separation and scour that from all parties, and force your virtue in extraction of the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Perhaps if you make bitterness contrary, then do so that you may recount primarily at first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the abscess separated from the separation and cure according to what you have said; and separation over abscess separated is less serious, because it is of little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some old women know some of these abscesses which are in the head in old homes where there is none of that moisture; the cause is because you have separated over an abscess on the head of an old woman and touched the abscess thus with a rough, harsh, white, which could not be pierced, and if someone had pressed upon it, they would have made it worse.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Perhaps in the other abscesses happening on the head another chapter is not this chapter, thus like the abscesses that come to the heads of children and one must remove the roots of the ears, perhaps the separation of all these things should be superficial separation.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower party, because it is more suitable to alleviate the body of the patient in the lower parties.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then cure them with what is convenient for that cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	About the separation of scrofulas which occur on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many vigorous abscesses occur in the neck and in the axillae and in the groin areas; and some vigorous ones occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which occur in the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all scrofulas of those have their own proper tunic, and thus like in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are many, because some of them are lumpy, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that which you have of good disposition in the Tocament, from which the color of it that is manifest is close to the color of the codena, and it is mauled to all parties, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the bitterness, and it is not preoccupied, so that you incise it in superficial separation from the party above to the party below the body of the line .G. until the line .B., and scour it all over the parties, and extend two lips of the codena on one side, or many sides if there is need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that it should not be incised into the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the space not be too narrow, that it does not adjust to your hand in incision, or quiet the malaute, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised vein or bitterness and prohibited you from your operation, then pause in the plague of vetriol trissat or other powders which stop fluxes of blood, and strengthen the plague, and leave it there until the acuity of the abscess is repulsed and the plague is mollified and begins to be purulent.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is drained away.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then investigate whether there are any causes of the other small scrofulous tumors, and dissect them and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large scrofulous vein, then avoid dissecting that scrofulous tumor from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Be careful not to touch that vein with a double-edged scalpel, and avoid making an incision until it falls by itself without injuring.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with a cloth soaked in Egyptian oil, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you dissect the entire tumor, then be careful to adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them up as soon as possible so that no superfluous material remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there has remained superfluous material due to the greatness of the tumor, then be careful to understand how to dissect its root, and separate it and apply a suture, and do what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those tumors that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation there where it appears to you the place of maturation, and stop the perforation of what seems to be the pus at the bottom of the body, just as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer perforation, with calques in ointment and similarly to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound is already cleansed, then cure it with ointment of generating flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	About the section of the pilum of the accidental abscess in the groin area.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancient doctors made this section about the pilum in the epilhot, and we do not see anyone in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those ones.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in the men who have had a relapse, be careful that the extraction of the pilum is avoided, because it was not done juvenilely for all the veins and major parts of the thigh are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses caused by wounds in the mouth or groin area or both ears, when the illness is not in the cane, be careful to use the section of pilum to flee from the loss which is done by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then be careful when you want to do that, to dissect the pilum below three circles of the circles of the pilum, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in cipher, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for dissection, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from the son who are loud.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, then be careful that he extends the cord of the groin area with an onion, and then inserts the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any of those causes.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then dissect the ciplach according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the flux which is from that exit with water that is from the disruption and for the abolition of the vomiting.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And thus the wound will be open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add the two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew it only to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And thus Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended is an exposition not only that you see that some of these abscesses have already operated on the groin area of the thigh, and the thigh has come to death, and its wing is between the legs, and some go to dissect the epiglottis so that the thigh breathes over the place of the wound for some respiration, and it is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that command to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and it is the malice of it for three days; and then command thus the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my meteors, is that a servant took a knife and placed it in his left groin area and dissected one part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to the cure of it, and I helped the mugwort just as it helps the dying, and I discovered the wound and helped the blood which was coming out of the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I confessed that it had not dissected a vein or a nerve, and the wind was coming out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not accuse the servant if he does not vomit, and then some days return to the administration of his own dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the pilum there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	The section about the abscess that occurs in the groin area beforehand, and it is called inguinal hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called inguinal hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, because it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, it does not require healing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is made by obstruction of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not occur that the fat pushes through to the cum unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that and investigate what I have told you, and if you find it similar to fat nodes, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise thus with the nodes, and extract the water that contains the matter from the skin and bursicle; and otherwise, then it is thoroughly examined throughout the entire essence, and you cure the place where the healing occurs until it is healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	About the section on the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many species of nodes and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it occurs that I recommend distinguishing the difference between node and evacuation, because it makes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So I say that evacuation is a quality and fever and vehement pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is sedated; and it is a complete putrefaction that then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node is not a quality nor fever nor pain, and it contains that cipher or secret which is its own proper sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a boil and it is made thus as a void, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, because some are fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So it occurs, when you approach the cure of a node, that you expose and inquire into its beginning with an instrument called introumes, according to which you will see its form in the chapter that is about to come.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you find humidity in the abscess, and you rotate the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cavity.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then you withdraw your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then you extract the instrument and consider what is left in the remains of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it in a superficial section according to what I have said about other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity in the remains of the instrument, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And it cuts about it in the section having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus you will enucleate it, and suspend that which is cut, and excavate the entire cavity of the part in a facilitated way, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, above it and extract that sanity from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sanity, and many veins are involved in that, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains of any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if none of the causes remain, little or much, the node returns according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the plague with some corrosive powders and strengthen the plague, and pause above that which is a cautious abscess, and cure it with another cure until it is healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you kiss the two lips of it and cure it with that which incarnates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse comes to the contrary, or is non-pulsating, then you bandage and fill the place with three triturated things that are vitriol and let it stand for two days or three until the plague is digested and the ebullition of the blood is restored; and then you return to incise what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	About the forms of the necessary instruments in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	About those are the forms of the intruments, and they are of three species, of which one is large, and one is medium, and one is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of aluminum, with curved extremities decently, so that they fasten the instrument in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experience, and they are named "altered", and one of them is called "feverish".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	It is of three species, because two of them are great, moderate and little.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience, the form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of moderate experience, the form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of little experience, the form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is suitable that these abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and boils occur because of those bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And these are the remedies, large, lion-like, thus with great needles in which they are treated with seatings, and they are remedies of iron, or of iron, or of silver, And the better ones when they are remedies of iron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And these are the experiences of black lead, which ones accord that for those abscesses in the cavity of which they are reflected, that they are reflected with their levity in those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And it is of three species, because some of them are long, and others moderate, and others short, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the abscess and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of great experience of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of moderate experience of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of small experience of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the ulcers are from many species, because some of them are simple, which ones have a single curvature only, and it is of three species: great, little, and moderate.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of them there are open ulcers, and it is of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them there are ulcers having two curvatures, and it is of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them there are those having three curvatures, and it is of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a great simple ulcer, the form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a moderate simple ulcer:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple ulcer, the form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a great open ulcer:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a moderate open ulcer, the form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small open ulcer, the form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a great ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a moderate ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a great ulcer having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a moderate ulcer having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a small ulcer having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels which ones are used to cut and scrape the nodes and the abscesses, and it is of three species, because some of them are great, moderate, and little.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of a great scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of a moderate scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those which ones are made to cut so aggressively and the other extremities not aggressive, and not so paused in such a manner, but rather done gently in the excision of the nodes the fear of inscizio of vein or nerve, and for those which heal the patient and bring tranquil little per the adjustment which brings away the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of poultices, and it is of three species: great, moderate, and little, thus with true veils.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a great poultice:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a moderate poultice:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small poultice:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are remedies of iron and similar to the ray which one is, and made with alum.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the extreme pointed instrument, hidden space and in that cord to the divided parts, and before, when you want, thus with vessels.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of probes, which ones are hidden between the fingers to perform the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and it is of three species: great, moderate, and little.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of bloodletting which ones are absconding the flow of blood, and it is of three species; great, moderate, and little; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are remedies of iron, rounded ones with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is that these species of bloodletting are your great, moderate, and little, because for those absconding the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first administer it, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, they do not use those to abscond blood in every part of the body, and they only use them in fleshy places, thus in the muscles of the arms and legs, and in the muscles of the chest, and of the belly, and of the groin, and similarly to their fleshy muscular counterparts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some remedies are fashioned from those other small instruments resembling scissors according to this method; for which the saint is absolved when it is done for phlebotomy, or for making an incision in a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some remedies are made into round pills according to this method.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's nipples which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some remedies are inflated into the nipples of certain men who lack the complement of sleep as if they were small children, and thus inflated nipples, and similar to those of women, and we Roman Apothelems leave them.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who has that, I advise that you make an incision in those veins according to this method, from line B to line G, and then totally remove the bitterness, and fill the wound with incarnated medicinal plaster, and adjust the two lips of the wound with a cosidura, and cure the one who enters so that he may be healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the nipple declines to the lower parts and is mollified by its magnitude thus like in women, then it is divided into two lunar figures, each containing one in the other, so that the major line contains the minor according to this method from line B to line G. And then remove the codena which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure until it is healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which I advise to make for the discomfort of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then I advise that you fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive oil and leave it there until it corrodes what is rough from the grayness, and thus cure the one who enters so that he may be healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that come from beneath the tongue.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from beneath the tongue are of the species of scrofulas, hard, which contain a skin that is sacred.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity I advise that they be incised with a lunar figure: from line G to line B. And when everything is totally evacuated what is in the abscess of the shin, then you complete it with much cloth and leave it there until another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cloth should be placed and be cured conveniently in a suitable ointment, until it is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes, and of scrofulas, then you should section above it thus as we have said in the section on scrofulas, in an angular manner.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes purulent, then administer to it a cautery according to what we have previously stated about that.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of abscesses that occur through arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the codena is consolidated which is above that, then many remedies occur for abscesses and signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is through an artery it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and when you touch the abscess on the tender spots, you feel a stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through a vein is round at the manifest of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section about this abscess is erroneous, and it increases in that which is beneath the ribs, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore I advise that its cure be eschewed, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, I advise that it be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But about that which is from the flow of inflammation of the orrific artery, section in the codena section at length; and then open the section with an uncis and then the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle above that agulha and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the artery with double thread in two places, — which causes you to have a double eye on the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then hold the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is evacuated, and thus dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer cure in which it is generated poor until the ligaments fall; and thus cure the one with suitable ointments until it is healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess by section of a vein, then I advise that you hold with your hand what is possible for the abscess in the codena, and then insert the needle beneath the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double file until you extract it from the other side, and then bind the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have said to you about the ligament of Uva, which is on both parts at both extremities of the file.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Sometimes it is necessary to extract the thread, then insert the sharp point of the needle at that angle from which the entire aposterium can be removed with the first puncture, and strengthen the tight threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then you will cut the aposterium in its proper place within, so that when it is seen that it is inside, then you will incise the superfluous skin of the knee, and thus it will be free from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over the pulse which has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with hot poultices and unguents until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the aposterium that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus it occurs that aposterium is caused by accumulation in the arteries and veins, and similarly aposterium occurs in the nerves when they are struck or affected by excessive labor, and by resemblance.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done in the manner of it in the places of the joints or ankle, or in every place where the joints are weakened.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe aposterium, and it is similar in color to the other body, and it is among the greatest of its dispositions, and when it is stricken with vehemence, it feels like the patient has a stuporous malady.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an aposterium that accumulates in the front of the body, and therefore it is below the knee, and it is weakened throughout and does not go to the anterior or posterior parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, since it is in the joints, it does not seem that it should be wrapped with iron, because strong contraction of the tendons would ensue.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Sometimes it happens that what is on the head or in the forehead falls to the knee through a spatulum.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Sometimes it is a minor aposterium, then you have the forces and abscesses that arise from roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it with an onyx, and excavate that, and then remove it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 50.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of aposterium that occurs from chill that reaches to the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It happens that some people have worn-out homes, exhausted and weakened in their stomachs and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal due to similarity with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head of it is large; and already their lips are converse, and it is of those who are small, and it is of those who are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in their stomach there were two fungi-like things, which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of minimal root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already their lips were turned inwards and were split, and humidity flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I incised those and extracted one from the weight of 18 ounces. and the other weighed six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation on their incision is that you consider then if the malady is humid, and the color of the matter is white, humid, with subtle root; then you incise it with a broad spatulum, and thus in your presence you apply cautery to the focus, because many weakened things are expelled from the section of it, very sanctified; and if you want the sanctification, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the malady is pauruc and tender, beware of incising with iron; sometimes then take a sharp point of fresh pom, and strengthen it on that matter, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it in the structure of the thread of pom; therefore, do not cease strengthening the large pom grain that is in the matter, until it is abscessed and falls by itself through its own labor.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Sometimes it is of large root, then in its incision there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Sometimes it is possible that you incise the worst part of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to incise the matter that is of dark color, of little feeling, of light regard, because that is almost cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I find myself remembering a case of cancer thus afterwards.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of inflammation of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Inflammation of the navel is caused by many causes; or by fissures of the ciphac which is above the stomach, and thus the fabric or intestine bursts according to the other ruptures; or by sanctification which flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or by constricted ventilation in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	Sometimes it is due to fissure of the ciphac and bursting of the fabric, then the color of the aposterium is similar to the color of the body; and it has a lion-like pain, and appears in diverse situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to an obstruction of the intestine, then the situation is such that what we have recounted, with more vehement diversity, and as you press on those tied parts it becomes hidden, and then return; and for a long time it was so, and it is magnificently revealed by the introduction of a gentle and vehement treatment.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Perhaps it is due to humidity, then it is clear and not hidden when you press on your hand, neither is it constricted, nor is it created.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then it appears that the abscess shows signs of black decay.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	Perhaps it is due to bad flesh, then it is a severe abscess, thick and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	Perhaps it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is clear.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the arteries, or of a vein, or due to windiness; then it is necessary to prohibit the cure of it, because in that there is fear and panic, just as I have written in the chapter where I spoke about the abscesses due to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then it is necessary that you command the patient to hold their belly still, and be steady extended; and then place your finger in the circuit of the entire navel, and command him to stand bent over between his thighs above the back, and circle around with a spatula flat on the circuit of the navel above the area where he has felt the pain; and extend the magnitude of the abscess to the divided parts down to an inch or more; and place it in the circuit with a strong faith or trust in the decent manner of the liar.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then you will open the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and insert the said finger into that indicator and explore the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded by the ligament, then you extract the extraneous matter and push back the intestine to its proper place in the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the membrane, then take that one out; and remove the excesses of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Perhaps it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle around that word, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong veins and insert the two needles into the circuit where you felt the abscess in a crooked manner, which makes them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess into four parts above the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area inside so that the extended flesh can fall back into place; or remove what is subtle and falls away, and then cure that which is necessary to heal the wounds inside so that it may be healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to bad flesh in it or humidity, then it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as I have said and extract the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then cure what is necessary and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Cure of Cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	I have spoken, in the division, of a species of cancer and in what manner it goes towards the cure of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid the cure with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and I have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And I will show that some excavated cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, just like the cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and similarly with the members allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	Perhaps when it is ancient and great, it does not seem that you can appropriate it to yourself, because you cannot heal from that ulcer nor have I seen another, nor has it been brought to that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is that which is allocated as I have said, it is that you precede and leave the patient and purge with black bile some excavated, and then you will know that, if it is touched, a manifest repetition.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which place is located for operation, and then prohibit in the truce of the uncis which are necessary for that; and then concave all parts to the good perexcrutation so that no roots of the causes of it remain.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that lightness, and express the places, and abstain from the thick blood all to your hand or instrument with which it is possible to handle the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps if you have made opposition to the thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure it with another cure so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Cure of Hydropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydropsy of water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not but the species of solitary altitudes, and it does not approach with iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hypochondriacs, because it is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have medicated this species of hydropic timpanistre with medicines and do not combine your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already achieved debilitation, or it is another hydropic malady, thus as if it is in the whole body or belly and seems similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is above all.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Perhaps sometimes the patient has an exuberant vertigo, and it is not another malady but only hydropic, and neither infant nor old, then the manner of the operation for him is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister places his extreme hand on the belly, inserting the water at the part below the navel, and then takes spathic spinning according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is of two acute long parts, of acute extremity thus as spathic; perhaps however it is in some brief small brevity little by little, so that in the operation he does not pass into the intestine, and that leads him.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydropic is from parts of the intestines, because then it behoves that you have the section tied to the navel for the quantity of three digits below, in the direction of the belly above the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Perhaps if the generation of hydropic is due to malady of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the mixing, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it does not behove that your section should be on the rib over which you want to transfer the malady so that the superfluous fluids do not flow to that free location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate with the entire instrument the cisterna, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spathic between the cisterna and the siphac, and you excoriate it; and if the quantity of an ounce or around.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the siphac until the spathic reaches the desired location, and it is the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or golden lion, at the lower part of which there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two from one part and one from the other part; and it is fashioned in the extremity of the instrument according to the manner of a feather, thus sometimes.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the extremity of the instrument there is a small ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it suddenly descends upon the instrument, and evacuates the water at that time in a moderate quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it does not behove at that hour, for the evil spirit of the animal would be resolved, or it would hasten towards the fifth crisis which is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Perhaps evacuate that according to the quantity of the vertigo of the patient and according to what the dispositions of the malady of the vertigo of the pulse of the patient and its goodness signify to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because suddenly it is retained by the cisterna which retains the tube that is above the siphac, of which I recommend to you that you perforate it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then iterate the instrument another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do that for some days above fear, and beware of error so that you do not remain with too much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps if you fear about the patient, and leave a great quantity of water, then cure that one who is buried in hot sand, and move him to a bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until he is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize upon the stomach, and the mixing and the liver, according to the extraction of water, as I have recounted in what has been said previously.
Capitol .lv.	The end.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the cure of children whose urinary places are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some weakened children are thus from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or has a narrow tube or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it behoves to cauterize the perforation of the patient as soon as he is born with a subtle spathic according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the tube a small key of lead and tie it, and you for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine which goes to the area will not be cleared from this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Maybe that of which the stricture is straight should be medicated with key of Flow, thus as we have said, for thirty days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Maybe those in which the stricture is not in its place, so led to, which causes because of those, that which is born and the trau is deprived of the end of the head of the rod because it cannot urinate at the divided parts, until it elevates the rod with its hand at the divided parts below; and it is not for generation, for thus because the sperm cannot reach the womb according to rectitude, and it is a great malady.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient should be seated on his back, and then extend the head of the rod with your left hand in a vehement extraction, and insert the head of the rod into the area of the perineum with a spatula, thus as it is inserted like a feather, or you do not touch any part, so that the mien of the rod seems to be at the head of the rod and the stricture falls into its proper place according to need.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times it happens to stop; and pause at the moment when it absorbs the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 6.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the white ulcer that occurs on the perineum at the head of the rod and of corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the perineum at the head of the rod.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times it happens that this white ulcer occurs on the rod and it is a sign of great carnal weakness.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it is necessary that you suspend with a subtle unguent and absorb it until it disappears completely; and then pause over the underlying skin, submerging it in Egyptian ointment; and then, cure the wound daily with finicon ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary that you administer cautery at the insertion of it and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Maybe if the ulcer is on the perineum of the head of the rod in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the ulcer is inside the perineum and another part is outside, then it is necessary that you remove the ulcer which is inside from the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer one, because when you cure the inner one, it is not assured that it will not be troubled.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also it happens in the genitals and on the perineum with blackness and corruption, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all that which has been denounced and that which wants to corrupt or that which is corrupted; and then apply liniments over that with good millet flour of scorched wheat and of errors, trissatz and crivellatz.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure it with another treatment until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Maybe if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because juvenile cautery is in two dispositions at the same time, thus it is a flow of blood and a wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the rod is corroded and is destroyed entirely at that hour, then it is necessary that you introduce into the middle of the perineum a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the perineum to the head of the rod (and this adhesion does not happen except in those whose perineum is sound, and on it no circumcision is performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or apostema) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the rod is liberated from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to disentangle those exquisite things, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula for some cause of the head of the rod and of the perineum, and thus it is because the perineum, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the perineum and the head of the rod with a subtle drizzle of liquid, which has been softened in warm water so that they do not adhere again another time.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it is cured with a seven-step treatment until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 7.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the purification of children and the cure of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity thus as the other wounds: maybe emperor with our operation and our will, and those of that are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and a more gentle way to preserve their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experimentation, which causes the majority of artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with novacula and torores; and they used ligament with faith and insertion into the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	You have already gone through all these manners and do not get bewildered by the various mixtures of medicines, because in the mixture there is a similarity with the onguent, since many times the coding of the prepuce to two tunics, and Roman tonic is added afterwards, and it is strengthened by another inscription and sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the mundification which is made by alphabetic, and it is digital, of which the saboteurs make use, it is not insured the inscription on the extremity of the virile member, because it enters strongly into its tract.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	Maybe in the operation on the nail, you strongly obstruct iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the coding of the infant is brief by nature, and many times it is seen in such a manner that there is no need for mundification, and you have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Maybe from the mundification that is made with onguents and lamentations of fiel, goodness, experiment describes it to me, because the onguents are of proportional inscription, for which the acuitation that is below is also as the acuitation that is above; and thus as you press your hand so proportionally two acuitations, and inscribe them according to a comparison in one time; and it is made with compression of fiel in a figure containing the coding of the whole partition, in which there is no chance of error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the infant stay in a major position if it is one of those who understand a little, so that you do not do anything but place the fiel on its verge only, and that you let it enter into another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that rejoice in all that manner which is as much as possible for you to receive its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make that stay between your hands, well prepared and established, and do not let it be seen; and hide the onguents in your hand or near the foot, so that the infant does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into its verge and blow on the coding, and pull it out so that the head of the verge is seen, and then mundify that which is added to it with filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked place with double fiel, and then tie below that one small ligature according to the lament, and then tell me at the said place and indicate the place of the lament below in good retention, and inscribe between two laments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then elevate the coding above the ligature and extract the head of the verge; and then let the blood flow little by little, because it is better; and pause powdered dust above and on the powdered dust pause a drap in which there is spread a mixture of oil extracted from various herbs, recently roasted and boiled; and let that be above until another day; and care for that with curative intent until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the onguents for mundification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some of the extremities are not-taloned and others are taloned, so that the branch of the nail is not seen, and it is the length of the two acuitations also as the length of two manual handles in harmony.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Maybe the error in mundification is because you strongly effuse the internal coding entirely, or part of it deviates from the inscription.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, I suppose that you extend that of your hour at your nail before the apostemation of the place and that you inscribe it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it at your nail, then extract it in a hook and inscribe it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Maybe if three days have passed, and Roman water that is inflated below the apostematized verge, then you let it enter until the apostema is cooled, and excavate that which is facilitated, and inscribe it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the verge, because it will not hurt at that water.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then care for that with water that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is inscribed from the coding according to measure, and you obey the parts below, that does not bother at all.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And maybe care for that with water that we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 48.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is made by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by poisons or by wounds, and it seems similar to those of water that we have said about the manners of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and there is retention of it being by stone which already is in the neck of the bladder, then I suppose that the patient is encumbered over the sick kidneys.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then combine the feet of that one over the sick kidneys and extend the sick belly from the part above the sick kidneys, and the patient stretches the sick wings as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the bladder's neck is constricted, it hinders the expulsion of urine into the rear parts, so that the urine is absorbed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved in water that we have said is vehemently made into the cause above the patient, then it is necessary to administer an extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and its conical end should be subtle, like a thin cane of a reed, in similarity to a palm and half, at whose tip it should be subtle.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of examining the urine is that you should take the folded thread and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good liaison; and insert the extremities of the thread into the rear part of the syringe, and push them into the forked tips if there is any superfluous cause in the wool, but introduce it into the cane with vehemence. And then place the syringe in a bowl and album of urine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on a chair, and enclose the bladder of theirs and the verge with olive oil and anoint it, and anoint it with olive oil and oils.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the syringe to facilitate entry into the root of the bladder; and then double the bladder from below at the part of the naval; and then fill the syringe with that; and then fill it so that it reaches the bladder, and then the patient is reached by the cause, and it is not done in this order, but rather the meat on which it goes to tortuousness.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then stretch out the thread into the small wool little by little, because the urine dries the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and make a cure for urine, and use a syringe, do not cease to evacuate the water and use the syringe until the bladder and the patient are greatly alleviated.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 6.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of evacuation of the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments which are adapted to water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or it is constricted with gangrene, or it is obstructed by poyredura, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is necessary to make an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but rather that at the extremity of it is a hole, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three channels: two from one part, and sometimes more.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is water that is imprisoned, and it is according to the quantity that oppiles that, its addition, until when some cause is withdrawn from the humidity, it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what makes the clampcedra in which there is phicated naptha in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to draw humidity into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and withdraw with that water which is imprisoned in the lower parts, because the humidity is withdrawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the bladder according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then fill the humidity with that water which fills, because that humidity passes through to the bladder at once, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle crystallizer in which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is so subtle that it seems like a small feather, and below it has a hollow tube.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then introduce the extremity of the crystallizer into the bladder.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that the humidity has already passed into the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you are not present at the bladder, then take a piece of parguames and make it into that circle; and perforate it with all its returned totality; and then introduce a strong thread into those channels, as they are revolved; and then add the circle as it is added also to the softness, so that you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that to the instrument and make it as it is made in the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humidity passes into the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 10.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that the patient must be placed in a chair where they can operate with their hand, and assist them.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The chair prepared in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you already know how to make a clear and brief exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it is said that the chair prepared in the bladder mostly goes to the children; and of its signs are that the urine that is issued from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels his rod, and many veins are felt, and it is properly dressed; and I know for certain that the anus is open in many of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is the healing of the children's health from that age that they have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult to cure in the veins.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More often in the young ones it is worse because it occurs among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that one whose chair is greater and the cure is more difficult; And if it is slight, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with Christ's cross, which extracts all the filth that is in their sick veins; because that filth prohibits the descent of the chair, and the inquiry of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then be near the patient with their feet elevated and constricted, and held in a way that the chair descends to the region of the bladder, or that it jumps from place to some veins.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and his hands are placed under the hips of him, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then seek out that and all that defect.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the chair in the space, then you will find it immediately with assistance over him.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not find the whole of it at once, then it is necessary that you anoint with olive oil the said finger of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said finger if he is a young adult, and insert it into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And seek out the chair until it stays under the said finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press above that with the said finger, and expel it to the lower parts before you see the place where you will assist.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to stretch out his right hand towards the upper parts, and hold his other hand under the codena which is below the genitals, in the place where the assistance is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatula beneath the incident of which this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and you separate it in the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, beside the side of the left hip; and be the assistance on that chair and the said finger is in the anus, and make transverse assistance, so that the assistance from before is wide and direct, according to the quantity that you feel of the chair being possible, and no more, because you will compress the said finger which is in the anus the chair from which the assistance is forgotten, and it is often difficult.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you know that of the chair there are some which have an angle and margins, because the evacuation of it is made difficult for that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that water it is like a lion similar to a globe, and it is round, and it makes the easier evacuation.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that one which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forgotten, then it is necessary that you lean over that, or that you strengthen over that with decent gestures, the extremity of which is like a lime on which you strengthen over the chair, and do not evacuate from it; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	More often if you cannot reach that, then you amplify the tract a little, and if you see flux of blood, separate it with strong vinegar triturated.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	More often if the chair is more of one, then at the beginning you push the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it over him; and then push a little more water; and similarly make many movements.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is a very large chair, then ignorance is that you insert it with great assistance, because it harms the patient for one of two causes: either he dies or he becomes accustomed to the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not totally consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	More often administer expulsion of it until it is forgotten, or insert into the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And stop on that damp cloth infused in oil and wine, or in oil rubbed with water, so that the postema's heat may be calmed.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then restore the patient to their bed, and do not discharge the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when the aura is discharged, anoint the area with water and much oil, and then take care to heal that wound with diamond-like remedies and dibasilicon remedies until it is healthy.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Sometimes in the plague, postema heat is accidentally adjusted, and corrosive, and of that same sort as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and therefore urine is prohibited (and that is known through the egress of the blood in the urine), so then insert the warm tieu in the plague and extract that blood, because it remains to provoke the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the plague with wine, water and salt, and apply opposition to all species, with that which is convenient for the cure until it is healthy.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And take care in all hours of the entire cure that you read to both thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the bladder, and it is fixed in it, and urination is prohibited, then cure it with what you have recommended beforehand so that you may pass through to section, because many times veiled passages are accused of section; and already you have spread out this, and it is that you take a perforator of iron alloy, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, pointed, fixed in a shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thread, and tie it to that which holds the bladder beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating with facility until the perforator reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the perforator with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you perform the perforation of it until you make that from the other part penetrate; because the urine will then be absoluted.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that which is remaining of the stone from the part before the bladder, because it is triangular, and it is forced out with the urine, and the patient is healthy.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Sometimes this cure is not adapted for some cause that prohibits it, then tie a thread beneath the stone, and another thread above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then incise over the stone in that bladder between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then discharge the bandage and clarify the congealed blood, which is done in the plague.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have a bandage of thread beneath the stone, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage above, because when the thread is discharged, the stone returns to its place and takes away the plague.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary to have the thread above, that you elevate the stone to the parts above, or that it returns with the warm compliment, and takes away the plague thus as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 16.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Sometimes a stone appears in some of them, then the cure of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman's bladder is weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you do not find a woman who knows how to describe her own measurements to the doctor when it is cast, or they are of the women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is because you do not find a woman who knows this art, mainly the operation with her hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of section over stone in women is longer than the place of the stone, because it requires a deeper section, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Sometimes it is necessary to provoke you to this, then take care that you find a wise woman who knows how to operate, and few are skilled.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Sometimes you are deprived of this, then seek a wise and subtle woman, or present a mature woman who is skilled in the affairs of women, or a woman who in this art has parted from the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that present, and command to it that it does all that you will order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that it takes care if the woman is weak, then take care that you put the instrument in its rear and extract the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if it is extracted, cut that beneath the instrument, and then command to it that it incises over that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Sometimes if it is not weak, then command the matron to insert the instrument into the hole of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehends that with good comprehension.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, when you touch that, then it is good to gradually evacuate the noxious matter from the bladder to the parts below, as it is a sign of its virtue entering into that through the narrow passage of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then place a compress on that affected area of the thigh, where it is constricted by the narrow passage of the thigh, and bind the stone in that part, and do not let it be removed from the stone, which is constricted below.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the rod into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity which you think the stone will be extracted from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are many: some are small and large, and rough, sharp, long and round, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you know how many types of stones there are from that which you signify above what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the vitriol-treated location and apply it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare yourself with the instruments which are necessary for the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is injured, then you stop powder on the location and strengthen those pulverized and descending strictures, and do not iterate that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because you will strongly kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then when the bleeding has ceased, then apply some warm compresses, and the location will purify itself, then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia and cause.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not only an accumulation of humidity in the white cavity which is below the codena of the genital area containing the humor, and it is called a cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some swollen veins are in the proper skin fold which prepares nature in the area of the humor, until it is known that it is another humor; and it is the codena of the genital area between the white cavity which we have mentioned, and it is not just a tumor.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genital area, so that to those it is fundamentally attributed, and some veins occur through percussion made on the genital area.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has many colors, because the color of the humor is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and filthy, or it is whitish and watery, and that is what is most prevalent.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known are these: because if it is in the white cavity which we have mentioned, then the apostema is red and declining a little in length, thus forming a figure of humor, and it appears in the genital area, because the humidity contains all that part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper skin fold, then the apostema is red and appears in the area of the humor, and thus one estimates that it is another humor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the codena of the genital area and the white cavity, then you will find the sentiment below.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you will spread the color of the humidity in the apostema in the innermost layer of the cavity whose form is previously described; and according to what is written in the vestige of the innermost layer, judge from that which is hidden within.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the cure of the iron deficiency, then it is good to command the patient to take flea-bane if that is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the iron pleurisy.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then it should be resupinated over the two seats above some cause a little higher, and stop below the word drops.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then you should sit on the left side of it, and command the minister to follow on the right side of it, which extends its rod to one of two layers at the codena of the genital area and at the parting of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and separate the codena of the genital area from my place for the length until you reach the pentagonal line.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to the rectangular engagement distant from the line that separates the skin of the genital area, until you reach the white cavity comprehending.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excavate that, and observe, and guard yourself for thus you do not injure it; and your excavation is the one which that excavates by parting the humor more and subtly scrutinized in the excavation according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the cavity full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the wound with an unciform instrument, and extend the siphach to the divided parts above; do not touch the codes that comprehend the genital area, and insert the siphach in that manner that is as discreet as possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	You insert that in its entirety or in pieces, and you increase the subtle flow of the sieve, because if you do not meticulously examine the insertion of it, it is not a safe guarantee that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps the fluid proceeds from that defect of its code in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the siphach, return to that, and then adjust the two lips of the code of the genitals with a suture, and then cure that thus with the other plagues, until it is sanitized.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the fluid corrupted by another malady, then it is necessary that you lift the vessels which are suspended above, and extract the fluid, and then cure that thus with water as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	Perhaps the water is distributed in two equal parts, then you know that two are the hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done in the other engagement; and if it is clear to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you purge the blood, and enter into the sections of the submerged lane with oil or rose oil; and pause before another lane which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over both genitals and the miracle of the belly; and pause above doubled drapes and pulvils, and link those above the liement which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two drapes and fill the lane of the carmenade fabric according to this resemblance; and fill the extremities with those that are wrapped in cotton or humid lane, and add structure to the breeches of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes hold of the backside up to the two, and the second takes hold of the part of the peritoneum, and two extremities over two hips below and two other extremities over two angles, and all the structure is adjusted in the breeches of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some veguadas for this hernia are medicated artificially with a cautery in place of the section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutellar cautery and insert it into the code of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white siphach containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled in a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that siphach, and ignite until all the humidity is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the siphach with an unciform instrument, and scrape with an unciform instrument, and scrape with a subtle ignited cautery; insert that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the fluid that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more salvaging and more remote from the flow of blood, and better than an operation on the section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Perhaps you have made a counter-irritation aposteme in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then it is necessary that you cure what counter-irritation you make for water, with curative care that convenes to it according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Perhaps the patient is poor, and does not hope for the second operation due to its horribility, then administer piercing according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified by you, for water that we have said of the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on some elevated seat, then pierce the aposteme in the lowest part of it with a spatula lat, and pause the piercing according to the longitude of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it is the wide perception until all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then pause on the cottony place and link that to it, so that the remainder of the water flows out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure it until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Perhaps the counter-irritation is at the origin of the water in that hour when you pierce it: and this is not done except for the reason that the white pantaloon in the orrifici of the plague makes a counter-irritation and prohibits the egress of the water, then it is necessary that you put in the plague a penal instrument or an instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropitz, in the form of which precedes; or adjust on the opening of the plague a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and it is augmented then via six months or in those environments; and as it is augmented, then it is pierced according to that measured manner, because the patient will also pass the seven days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	It seems that the patient knows that in the section above this hernia, there is a lost fear of perniciousness in the major dispositions; because it has been seen by me the dismissal of it and being saved for that better milhor.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you will also remember the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So, it is said that the abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are compacted and it is done for many causes: either for acute sharp superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or for percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not detected in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And indeed it is a putrid abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not give a sensation to the body.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some remedies are done for the swelling of the roots, and for the inflammation of those veins that have already perceived the memory of it, or for the inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is for the inflammation of roots is recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when it compresses them in those same ties; and it does not cover that which touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is done for the inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause unless it is compressed in those same ties.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that above this species a section was made and above the other carns; and it is that you incised the codena of the genitals, and then stretched the skin to the upper parts, and extracted that from the white ciphac, and freed the suspensori of the veins, and ligated them, and incised the suspensori so that you freed that from all parts of the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the skin is already consolidated in those carnal layers, then it covers that you extract the skin and incise that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between some cause of the ciphac, or between that which is between the veins, then it covers that you free all that adhesion and incise that for a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it covers that you incise all that which is of it, and extract the skin as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin ointment and rose oil; and then heal that in another healing process until it is sanctified.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of hernia that comes from vit.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an abscess enveloped by some envelope-like broto with mollification of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercised movement and walking on the affected limb.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this disease, it is by fear for that which is preceded by memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I think that I should do an operation on that according to what the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to place the affected limb on an elevated pillow; and then apply the suspensori of the testicles to the lower parts; and then incise the codena of the genitals in those same ties in the veins that are probable to the verge; and hold those other ministre that you, and extend them with vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise in the spatium laterally to the transverse section in the right of the veins until they discover the hidden veins.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excavate all parts as I have said in the extraction of roots which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those an agulha on which is done double faith, and tie that to the first of the places where you find vit, and tie another remedy behind them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle place for a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the fetid and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with a cure of the other wounds in which you want to be sanctified so that the veins which are not obstructed by one of the two genitals may flow, because it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you find vit in all the veins, then it covers that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for that are cut off from the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the veins, and that they are stabilized, or that they are cut off so that there is no juvenation in those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by section that goes into the extended ciphac above the belly on the part of the anguinars of the miracle of the belly, so that by sending out the intestines of that rupture to some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the ciphac or of its excision, and it occurs in these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by fall, or by shouting, or by elevation of some severe cause, or by similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	In this case, it seems that the water of the patient, when it is due to extension of the liver, is that it accumulates little by little over a long time, and does not accumulate suddenly, and it is an apostema that enters through the veins to compress the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the urine of the patient is when it is due to dryness of the liver, because at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it is diverse apparent symptoms that appear before the proper codena, and this is due to inflammation of the intestine, and his body is divided into parts before the liver.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some evacuated matters are outside of the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia that turns round.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some evacuated matters are made in the ventosity, and some evacuated matters run into the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is a great pernicious thing of the patient, and some evacuated matters cause evil pain and worsen when it is premature.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of the species of this disease at that time fear is iron, because it seems that it has been excluded from the treatment in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand at the inner parts of their cavity if they obey the return of the sieve, and then it is placed over the sieve between the two thighs, and raises their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stop the codena which is the codena of the testicles at the lower parts, and insert the codena of the testicles throughout the length; and then fix in two labia of the section uncis according to what is indicated to open the section in those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that you can possibly make from that, the hole will be evacuated.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape off that which is beneath the codena of the testicles, until the white liver is discovered from any part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you introduce the finger into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white liver, which is beneath the codena of the hole, and between the liver according to, and absorb with that adherence which is in the back part of the hole.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then place the hand on the codena of the testicles at the front parts, and also extend the white liver with its hand on the left side, and raise the hole to the liver at the section part; and command the minister to extend the hole downwards and you dissolve the adherence which is behind in a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with the fingers to see if there is any cause of the intestine wrapped around the white liver.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find some cause of it, then you will fill that into the belly beneath.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle in which there are eleven thick threads of ten threads, and introduce it into the back of the liver, which is beneath the codena of the testicles, which is the section; and then insert the extremities that emerge from the thread until they are four threads, and then compose some of them over some figure in the manner of a cross; and bind it to the liver of which we have spoken, that is beneath the codena of the testicles with strong binding of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then envelop the extremities of the threads and bind them with strong binding until some of the veins that do not irrigate those cannot transmit any cause, so that from here no apostema can occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another evacuated binding according to the first binding, a long time of three days; and then these two bindings will be from the liver which is beneath the codena of the testicles, as much as the greatness of the finger, and insert all the remaining roundness, and remove from there the hole.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert into the part beneath the codena of the testicles for sectioning of that which will run with health and sanity, thus as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and some evacuated matters of the white liver are cauterized, which we have said to administer with the insertion of the tempered flux of health, because many evacuated matters accumulate there) and release the binding until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the treatment of that is delayed, then the hot water should be applied, and pause over it until it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the plague with another cure of plagues until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of windy hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that it has been hardened under the cure of that with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first doctors said that it is done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with us; which is to place the veins near the section over that with facilitated flux of that; and then cut in the middle location around the apostema in that, until the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Heal the wound according to what we have said so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the disruption that is caused in the veins.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some bruised areas end up in rupture of the veins, as we have said, and empty the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute to the genitals any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if you do, it is little; and return to it in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged in this way, an adjusted fissure is made in the sigmoid colon so that it expels the intestine from the sigmoid colon; and this occurs for the extension of the sigmoid colon which is in the veins, as we have said, which causes the sigmoid colon to be stretched out, and then it becomes soft and putrid at the area and empties.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery, as it was preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some bruised areas are cured in this way: the patient lies on their back between their two hands, and then dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses empties itself by draining according to the quantity of three digits.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white sigmoid colon that is above the codeine until it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the radish and place it on the prominent area of the sigmoid colon, and apply it to the navel of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then kiss the two prominent areas above the extremity of the radish of the sigmoid colon, and adjust one to the suture with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the radish, and do not insert into the entire sigmoid colon, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause, as you will know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then heal it with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the threads, purify it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the sigmoid colon is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is more suitable for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	About the softening of the codeine of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many bruised areas of the codeine of the testicles in some men are softened by this, because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is necessary to observe their condition.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who is engaged in the cure of it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert the entire codeine which is softened over the natural codeine; and then adjust both lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, then at the beginning of the treatment, remove the excess of the softened codeine with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the stitches; and then heal by healing of other wounds until it is healthy and the threads are cleared.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	About Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	I know that castration is forbidden in our law, but because of the cause I am forced to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that it is in the science of the doctor when he is expert in that, who knows the cure of it which occurs; and the other reason is that we often need castration of other animals for our young ones, such as of horses, and of goats, and of pigs, and similar to those animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by making a fissure for drainage.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	Moreover in that which is done by attrition, the method of the operation is that we make the animal drink hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take them with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Moreover in castration done by making a fissure and drainage, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the codeine of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the supporters, and insert above each hole in one drainage until two holes are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then insert them with a tube so that some excretion is purified.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on the sigmoid colon, but rather the subtle sigmoid colon which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And in this way of castration it is better which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly loosens any cause of the testicles so that the animal desires to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then heal the wound until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	About the cure of Hermaphrodite disease.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodite disease in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears in that which occupies the space in the codeine of testicles, in which there are two testicles, forming a figure like a woman's flesh.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And certain evacuated matters of that corr urine which are in the codes of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is a species: and it is that the womb of the woman over the perineum is also like two testicles of a man, a little smaller in all miniatures, beforehand like the perineum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three species: of two of men and of one species of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should cover those adjusted meats within so that they expel the impression of that, and then that you cure them with the treatment of the other plagues.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men, from which urine is made that is in the codes of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On obstructions and prominent flesh caused by women's affairs.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Obstruction is adjusted over natural causes so that it is tightened and made firm by observation; and certain evacuated matters are magnified in certain women to the extent that they spread also like in men, and are perceived during coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have the abundance of obstruction with your hand or on a hook and adjust it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not ultimately insert it, rather in the region of the root, so that there is no excessive flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then heal it with the treatment of the wounds so that it may be healthy.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrific womb of the mother so that it fills it, and obstructions are placed on the divided parts beforehand according to the resemblance of a snake (and for this reason some primary authors called it "caudal badness"); therefore you should insert it thus as we insert obstructions, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the womb of the woman is not perforated, or has a small passage.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to badness which has preceded, and that is made or for flesh not adjusted or for subtle or specific ciphers.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made or in the region of the mother, or in its ribs, or in its upper part, or in its lower part, and prohibits from conception and from pregnancy, and also prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by observation of the uterus, if the obstacle is apparent, certainly; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the threads or with the beam.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstacle is due to subtle ciphers, and it is proposed to the two labia, then you touch and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that which pauses over the two pubic labia, and then pauses the threads or indices of both hands in the midst.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her extended thighs, and then extends the two labia inward so that the subtle cipher is broken and the obstacle is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take an ointment and anoint the four oil holes, and pause that over the place, and hold it for a day so that the place is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cipher is large and specific, then you should insert it with a broad spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstacle is due to flesh, then suspend it with a hook, and insert it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And there are your medications that stop the flow of blood with their bite, like ahacatia, and dragon's blood, and essences, adjusted with the white album of Hou.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the wound is not consolidated too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for some days and administer lukewarm water of the dry season.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is healed with another treatment of consolidation so that it may be healthy.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And certain veins are born in the native birth of other flesh, and then you should insert according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for cancerous aposteme, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the womb not made contrary with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 23.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tile and of red botch that are born in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins so that they corrode blood continuously; and how ancient hemorrhoids are, and they are made tiles.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus about those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tiles when they are in the region of the womb and do not appear to the senses, then in those there is no treatment made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those which are in the orifice of the mother above those which feel sentiment, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is fitting that you place the woman in a warm bath and then extend the thigh to the forearm, or grasp as an assistant, and thus you will find those which are at the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those which have the flow of blood from one of the hidden vessels, thus causing numbness and seeming to be similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak the sick feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a decoction of herbs and roots of millet and of wheels and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and wine, and make an emplaster over that on the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is abscessed, well; and if not, make adhere to two ventoses, and to the nipples their scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge it in juice of colic root or juice of arnaglossa or juice of guarrivier with wine, and make adhere to the place; and then cure the place until it is whole again.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Those who have asperous regard, it is fitting that you inject that which appears to you according to what I said in the whole treatment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is whole again.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the accidental perforation of a hernia in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various special types of abscesses that occur in the mother, such as cancer and malignant apostema, and ulcerations and adherences and eruptions and hemorrhoids and ragworts and thigh and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these evils and the species of those and their signs and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is fitting that I should speak in this treatise on abscesses about the one which occurs in the mother when it is among those abscesses that collect sanity, and if you want to know how the operation of it is made with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore it is fitting that you consider if the pain of the abscess in the sick beginning is acute with percussion and fluctuation and fever, and sometimes it increases and feels sentiment upon it, then do not touch the perforation of it, and cure it with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then it is fitting that you make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back and adjust her feet at the partition below the belly, and her thighs are expanded, and place her arms below her knees, and tie something with a ligament to what is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife follows the straight path and administers the instrument with which one opens the orifice of the mother, in the form of which you will find in those causes that will be done properly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is fitting when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the radius of the mother's womb of the woman, and what of the instrument enters into the mother should not be more than the radius of the mother's womb and leads to the malady.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the radius of the mother's womb, then it is fitting that you place pads on the texture of the radius of the mother's womb so that the entrance of all instrument into the radius of the mother's womb is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is fitting that you pause the vertebral column that runs in the instrument from above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebral column until it is opened into the orifice of the mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is gentle and soft, then it is fitting that you separate that from the head of it with a spatula flat.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sanity is evacuated, then it is fitting that you place in the wound a submerged medicated oil or green oil on which there is some stipulation; and place the calcium in the section into the radius of the mother's womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then before the mother and on the entire clean wool submerged in water in which there are swollen mumps.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it is cured after two days with whole treatment that converges to what is convenient until it is whole again.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some vegetables are washed with the mother and the wound in such a way that it is crystallized in water and honey, and then in water in which there is infused root of iris or long aristology, and then returns to whole treatment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deeply rooted in the mother's womb, then it is fitting that you are prohibited from the cure of it with iron, unless you have cured it with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To instruct the midwives in which manner they should medicate the unnatural embryos according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the womb conceives at the beginning of the figure of natural childbirth through sensations of it, and it is that when you feel the woman expressing desire towards the lower parts and wanting to smell the air, and above this is entwined for that which is part of it, and fastens the sentiment of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the sentiment of it upon the seventh month, and the second one is that which hangs or depends from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then, when you feel those sensations, then it is necessary that the woman's belly is compressed so that the embryo descends more lightly, because it presses upon the seventh month, it presses on it the second one, and it is freed from those superfluous fluids with good mondification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Maybe that which is another part is unnatural and not-laughable, because when the embryo is situated upon its feet and the body of it is situated before its head and its feet, and its hand is one, or at its foot. or it is situated the head of it and its hand, or at its belly, and it is strongly converted upon the seventh vertebra, and it seems like the unnatural figures of it.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	There is a necessary cause for the womb to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that it guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you show the entire figure of those, and what engine is in those so that it is signified by that and is established upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is situated upon the seventh month by natural growth, and it is vehement against the woman and makes a difficult part, and sometimes its virtue is already debilitated, then make that separation, or so that women have it, and evaporates the congealed humor of it with fenugrec oil and olive humits.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then introduce the measuring rod between the seven small fingers of the spatulum, and find that second one, or dry that on its own nail until it corrodes that which is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Maybe if it doesn't descend, then it is necessary that the woman be crystallized with a poultice of powdered ptilli and powdered fenugrec with cizami.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it to her, then crystallize it, so that it is compressed and makes that stormy turmoil with condiments; and close its mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will be forced out soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are not yet fully forced out at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce those with facilitated small steps.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Maybe if it doesn't obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then settle the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she doesn't fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not yet turned and the fetus dies, then cut those and extract the remaining part of the fetus or lift the body to its mother with a drag and extract that with equality, because it will be forced out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The sentiment of the embryo upon the seven feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is upon the seven feet, then it is necessary that you impel those in themselves, and then convert the small fetus, and then impregnate that, and then take one of its feet and extend those small steps.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Maybe when they are situated between the thighs, then you command it to come out, and make that external turmoil with condiments, because it will be forced out if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forced out in that which we have recommended, then return the small fetus to its natural figure, because it will be forced out later with a lighter sentiment.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited in all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of altaea and dissolved goma, and percussionate everything in the mortar for good percussion, and then line up with the humor of the woman, at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that mixture in warm water, until you obtain the hypochondriac remedies.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the lower parts of it are purified, then make for it the sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause that at it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you do the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make it settle on a chair, and then make that turmoil and extract its mouth, and lift from that, and press the lower part of its belly with lighter compression, because the fetus will soon be forced out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The sentiment of the fetus upon the seven fingers and its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is situated according to this form, then you engineer it into introducing its small hands little by little; and the woman should be seated upon the seventh vertebra, and her feet are bent down, and those are placed upon the loins, and complete its hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press upon the belly of it little by little, and then extract that which is below its feet from the aurelia until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot is not forgotten, then take his feet and move them vigorously, and gradually place them on the hypochondries, little by little, until the foot begins to recover its proper functions.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually insert his hands and slowly bend the foot, and order the woman to exert herself until the foot is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examine the foot laterally while holding one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be ingenious in the reduction of his hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her go there.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go, then place the matting on the bed, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous concussion, and gradually administer remedies that you have recommended for softening.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the inflammation has come, then place the seizer on the affected part, and gradually study the reduction of the hand, and bend the foot according to its natural shape, and make the woman stand upright and order him to compress it until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examine the foot on the expanded joints, his hands, and the surface of his feet, which are at the back of his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	So that the midwife holds the foot's hand and gradually turns it little by little, and thus facilitates it.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is bent, and then pause on the joint of his foot that we have recommended to be treated with oil and softening remedies.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And gradually order him to massage it little by little, and when you have done that, then place the seizer on an affected area and order him to incline it over the right side, and gradually order him to be compressed; and make him stand upright in a convenient condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus is turned onto its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you diagnose a horrific condition of the mother according to this method, consider, and then you insert your finger into the second finger of your hand until it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended above the face and neck of his, then you insert that of the naval, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And gradually employ the foot to the divided parts until it pauses according to what is necessary, and order the woman to compress herself in some intervals, and it will be forgotten in the examination of the easier, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that many twins are born naturally, and some times three or four, but that is strange and Tartarus' end; but I do not understand the causes of unnatural birth, and it is not living.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count them, yes it is that they are multiplied, a second one, and are separated by a cipher, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each umbilical cord; some intervals are forgotten thus as one fetus for natural examination easier, and so some intervals are treated for unnatural examination thus as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver because of their deviations from natural birth and come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you cure them thus as we have reported.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what facilitates and subtlety, and tardiness, and be ingenious according to the whole figure as it is prepared for the ingenuous birth to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some wounds are formed in the matrix one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more, and I have already verified that a woman who has aborted seven times will have all types of wounds, and another total formation, which causes fatigue from measuring the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that is necessary for the science of the midwife to be strong enough to reach that small part of it, and therefore stop there as I know.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus in what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not before examined, and you are forced to use operative action on the hand, then it is necessary to consider if the woman is of sane virtue and not among those accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a bed with her back supported by two pillows, and her head inclined downward and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister holds that of two parts or is tied to the bed so that the body of hers does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And gradually you humidify the mouth of her womb with oils and softening remedies of altaea and of fenugrec and of sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And gradually the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and softening remedies, and gradually inserts her hand to facilitate in the womb, and gradually seeks the hand in the place where the fingers are on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	It looks convenient to you: then consider if the feet are prepared that you should place them on a high seat, and afterwards fix the toes in the heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or also in the beard, or in the armpit, or in the proper places of the ribs, or also in the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Maybe the placement is on the soles of their feet, then on the little toe, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the toe with the right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and meanwhile facilitate the hand and fix the toe in some of those places where the fingers have held, until you reach the underlying cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and fix in the application of another toe, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its straightness as much as possible.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And massage the whole affected part, so that the efflux of it is alleviated thus as it is done in teeth to achieve the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in that water which is between them so that the extension is mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it is necessary to massage some of those fingers with oil and meanwhile entwine those expertly and revolve around that water which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the foot is forgotten, then the toes are permuted into the place where it was previously put; and do so until the whole foot is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	Maybe the hand is exhausted beforehand, and it is not possible to reduce that due to its contraction, then it is necessary that a wrapping is enveloped over that; and then extract that until it is completely forgotten, and insert it either in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it is necessary to do similarly on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Maybe the head of the foot is large, or it reaches its contraction in the efflux, or it is at the head of the adjusted water, then it is necessary to entwine between the fingers spatulum spinos and break the head and extract the water, or that discovers with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be seen in the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that is about to come.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly it is done if the foot has a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to insert that with an algemat, or that takes that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is effluxed and contracted from the armpit, then it should be opened until the humidity which is in the pit is eliminated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Maybe if it is not complicated, nor does it obstruct the efflux, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the space of the belly is apostematized or is in the hydropic, then it is necessary that you perforate that until the corrosion of the humidity that is in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	Maybe if the feet are on the high seat, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Maybe if it is contracted from the belly and pit, then it is necessary that you extract that with a wrapping which you have enveloped over your hand, and that you open the belly and pit until the corruption of what is in them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Maybe if the other members are numb and the head is turned, then the metrona inserts the left hand; maybe if the mouth of the mother is opened, then insert the hand in the prison of the liver, and seek with that the head, and thrust that with the fingers until the mouth of the mother, and then insert into it one toe, or two toes, and thrust it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is contracted by apostema because it reaches the one which accedes to the u, then it is necessary that it not be troubled over it; beforehand it is necessary to administer effusion of humid and greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer emplasters; and follow the patient in waters that mollify and humectate.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the feet are on the high rib, then if it is possible, it should be agitated: and it should be administered what we have said in the old foot.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be inserted in patches, and it should be extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any underlying cause of the second fever.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of the apostemas caused by the ones which accede to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if it accedes to flow of blood, then it is necessary to place them in stipitic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in the belly of which was dead foot, and then on that same focus another pregnant wound, and then the dead foot is the other foot.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that for a long time an abscess has been forming in the patient's swollen belly; and it has inflated inward, and begins to take hold of the arm.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have been called to care for him, and have treated him for a long time, but the wound is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you should place upon him some plaster of strong attraction, and extract from him a bone, and then you will pass some few days, and extract another bone; and you have been too marvelous, since there are no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you should think that they were from the dead foot's bones.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you should heal the wound, and extract from him many bones, the woman existing in the numerous milk-like dispositions, and already you have seen it in such a manner for a long time, correcting one small arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you do not find it strange, but rather that it is science and help to arrive at the artificial hand by which the doctor performs administration of care.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the foot.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertebrae in which the matrix is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of stretcher on which the books are placed, to which stretcher two vertebrae are joined at the ends of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	The emperor ordered this vertebra to be made more subtle than the stretcher, and it was made of ivory or of wood from trees.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And it was the width of each wood that two fingers and a margin of each hand that one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of two woods there are two adjustments of that same wood which are already fixed, of which the length is a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the matrix so that it is opened when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that one, but more subtle and more lightweight:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It was made of wood from ivory or trees according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	The emperor ordered that on the extremity of him there be two additions thus at times, and the length of those additions is a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the matrix, then you do seize the woman above the lying feet, pending on opening what is between his thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then you will hold your hand on the instrument thus as you do with forceps, according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the matrix's mouth, until the meter makes it so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertebrae which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of propeller in which the foot is propelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of amputator in which the big head is cut off:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like a forceps to which the teeth are attached on the extremity, thus at times, and some veiled ones were made long thus as forceps according to this form, thus at times, to which the teeth are attached thus as the teeth of resection in which they are incised and cut off.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of small amputator:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which the teeth of closure are attached, in which the head of the foot is cut off:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities at which the head is absorbed:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exceptional, and when they are multiplied, the species of that are prepared by the artisans, as it is lighter in their operation and more autonomous from the men for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you do not lack those instruments, for it is necessary that they be there, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	About the extraction of the second [or secondary] one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the secondary one is retained by the enfantament, then it is necessary that you command the malady to retain its own ale, and then you make that stornudar in condition, and strengthen your hand over its mouth and over its nostrils, and if thus it is deformed, well it is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And afterwards, then you take a cup and perforate in the covering a hole and pause on that herb which opens the mouth of the matrix, thus as calm and rough and aniseed and camomile and Arabic scammony and cassia lignea and santal.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cup, and pause that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then you pause a cane of cane in the mouth of the matrix, and hold it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the matrix.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then you will make that treatment thus as we have said, and the second one will be rapidly forgotten.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Perhaps you will perform this cure and it is not useless, then you order the midwife to submerge her left hand in warm oil or in a mixture of other herbs, and then you insert that into the womb and search for it with the second one, and when you have found it, take it out little by little. Perhaps it is annexed to the womb of the mother, then you insert your following hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little so that the mother does not feel vehement attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before you proceed, make sure your right and left hands are facilitated.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust it in the quantity of attraction, so that it will obey and evacuate adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's womb is constricted, we have not recommended the treatment with stirring and medication of the opening with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	Perhaps it is not forgotten among all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue about that in iteration of abstraction, perhaps however it is certain that what is ejected from her to the womb of the woman lies in the space of the female, and then crystallize that with enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it dissolve and be forgotten in a few days.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Perhaps when it is purified, it rises to the head, and to the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then it is certain that they have been administered subtle fumigations and conveniently adapted to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Perhaps some of the Ancients already knew how to prepare subtle fumigations from narcissus and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Method of instrument with which the woman is subtly fumigated to prevent the retention of menses and of the second one.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made from iron or copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle extremity is placed in the womb and the wide extremity is above the focus, and the subtle fumigation is placed above the arms of the focus.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that in until it is consumed by that subtle fumigation and then another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the treatment for the birth of an unperforated infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Born infants are like that and their births are not perforated, which have subtle signs and are covered over.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is certain that the midwife will perforate with the finger mentioned that sign; and if not, she will perforate with a sharp spatula, and beware that you do not touch the liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then stop on that woolen pad in vinegar and oil; and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	Perhaps you fear that it is covered over, then pause with a tube for many days, and wait until the infant wants to expel.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And then you hasten the covering of the birth for consolidation of plague or of abscess; then it is certain that this consolidation is incised, and then it will be cured with what we have said about the treatment and of the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment for fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur below in the lower part then swell and become thick, those which occur near the birth beforehand or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and corroded by the acidic white humidity or subtle putridity, and some vegetations grow from these fistulas, some penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating ones are known through what is ejected from them for the exit and for settling; and some veins use the badness of exit, and they are ejected from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from those fistulas some vegetations grow in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the meat of the vein; and from those penetrants into the joint of the hip and into the node of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the womb and non-penetrating, it is that you put the mentioned finger end in the womb, and then you insert a subtle probe of iron or copper into the fistula when it is not twisted.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	Perhaps if it is twisted, then insert the subtle probe of lead or horsehair into that until you feel the probe or hair in the mentioned finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all and it does not proceed from the tube for any cause of ejection or worm or windiness, thus as we have said, then you will know that it is non-penetrating, and then you should resort to treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vein, then the sign of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it from being thus, so that the place in medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Perhaps if it is penetrating into the joint of the hip or into the bone and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe penetrates here if it is not twisted into the bone, and causing pain in the circuit of the part; and that sometimes there is putridity; and that this medicine is of no value, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those ulcers penetrating not is the total cure, and the cure of those is the trouble and evacuation of foolish doctors above the one who stops them.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	Perhaps in that which does not penetrate and is not ancient, health is iron fence spread according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been and proposed.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands above his back and raises his legs inward towards himself, the thighs being inclined towards his belly, and you insert a probe of lead, or of iron if it is in the ulcerated tumor, until you feel the place where you perceive the probe.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels around the neck, then it is necessary that you insert your finger pointed into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger the probe already penetrated to discover if it has met, or if you feel between your finger and the siphac or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not trouble yourself with it, because it is not in it a cure, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Perhaps the emperor's physicians claim that it is healthy in some homes to be bitter.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medication by which you expect to cure the patient is that you apply subtle cautery according to the size of the ulcer, as it has been described, and you insert the ignited part into the ulcer until it reaches around the neck; and then you iterate this two or three times until you know that all those adjusted ulcerated flesh resembling a bird's plumage are fully cured.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then you cure that wound by enveloping it in bandages until all those adjusted flesh is fully healed, and then you cure that wound with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healthy, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe goes in, and does not penetrate into the finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is only a space of flesh or of siphac, and sometimes the ulcer is in what is the surface of the codena, then you drain the codena from the beginning of the ulcer, and you see that it is drained with the probe, and it is in the ulcer until the drainage reaches the place where you feel the extremity of the probe, and by the probe it is freed and extracted.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then you cleanse those ulcerated flesh which resemble a bird's quill and do not remain with any of those ulcers for any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Perhaps it is necessary to cleanse many times what comes between you and your operation when you touch those flesh, then the thousand times it is good and of the less proud instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cautery with fire adjusts well two good habits: so it is the adjustment of those adjusted flesh, and the cutting off of the blood's excessive excretion of humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then you cure that wound by enveloping it in bandages or in stitched causes until the place gets strength, and then you cure the plague with medicine that engenders and consolidates hard flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines are those which stop the putrefaction and excess; when then it is restored, it is already healthy and does not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	Perhaps the ulcer has already penetrated into the groin of the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then you insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And then you feel the probe and between you and it is only a space of siphac or of flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation on him unless according to the way of confidence and of hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This cause is to be administered in him in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to drain it until you reach the cavity of his body so that it is possible for you to insert the fistula and the proposed cure; and do not process more than one drainage so that you do not irritate the contained bowel, and that you agree upon the patient's consent; and then you cure it with what we have said because the strong sir is healthy; or you elongate the space and wound that you drain until you reach the anus, as we have said, either with a probe or another instrument of acute extremity, and then you cleanse those ulcerated flesh which are in the drainage until one can percuss; and then you strive to make the restoration of all the plague in the drainage, and if the horrid pus is not consolidated, and the ulcer remains open in the part of the anus, and it will be less proud for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And the ulcers are finished according to this way: it is when you insert the probe into the ulcer, and it is in the width of the anus around the surface of the body with the codena and in the margin of the anus, then you take a perforated extremity probe, which is like a needle prepared to pierce the flesh according to this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and you insert into that ulcer enveloped by five ulcers or around those; and then you insert the probe into the ulcer until you reach the cavity of his body.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If the penetration is in the margin of the anus because of dentition, then you extract the thread of that trauc thus that you introduce the finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the thread and adjust both extremities, and strengthen each one, and let it be for a day or two, and when you have inserted the thread in the flesh, strengthen well that entrance so that those fleshes are not inserted between the two extremities of the thread and fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then heal the wound so that it is consolidated and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared, but not so much in the groin, because it is not up to you to do that so that no laceration occurs; and then make that entrance be cured.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula is such that it is divided into a fistula: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not-acute, so that nothing unnecessary occurs, just as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	About the stitching of hemorrhoids in which a blood flow occurs during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are treated in two ways, because either they are between the buttocks resembling a carbuncle, or those are like a layer of rough skin.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them at times and it is one, and they are many, and they are outside the anus, and on their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus are treated according to the method of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood continuously, and it is according to the color of the flesh.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is dentition in the anus is that you command the patient to sit down and to exert themselves so that the anus opens up and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take them with your fingers and suspend them in an uncus or hold them with your nail, and then cut those roots with their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the uncuses are not held by them due to their humidity and softening of those, then take them with a rough cloth or a knife or a flannel of wool, and extract them from the fingers, and then cut them and powder over them some warm powders, in order that they be in place of cautery; or cauterize them according to what is written in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal those with another cure until they are cured.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey to excretion, then you clysterize the patient with a clyster in which there is a small amount of mild potion, and wash them with that water that is in the anus and it obeys to excretion more easily when the patient strains themselves.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is ease, and it is that you take them with your nail, or take them with an uncus, and cut them, and then heal those with what we have said until they are cured.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And he who has made an incision, must administer stitching of them according to this method: take a thread wrapped around and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the top parts, and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap both extremities of the thread around the part below the needle, and thus latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then cut the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And make it all whole, and let one of those be not bothered, so that the superfluity of the blood flowing from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then pause on the anus with a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate; and pause that on the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be until it scars; and when it falls, heal those with an ointment or another cure until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many ways are used for excision of a wound or for constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are antiquated and of no value in that medicine, then it is necessary that you root them out with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they are made humid and held back by the scab that forms above, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove them with a razor strongly that the first way until much blood flows and they are excoriated; and then heal those until they are cured.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the cure of wounds, it is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that wounds, it is clear, and it is not so if you do not notice the redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of nails, and it is made in all the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and fingers, and it ends for those who have pain in their limbs.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary that the doctor should inspect what is in the circuit of the vein, and hold the forked ends or hook, and eradicate the root; and then take care of that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you want, cauterize the gangrenous part that is located in the following chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More of a true wart appears as a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and many ulcers come in the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment of it is to extend or insert that, or to stretch it with a file or a pellet inside the box.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now the inverted and non-inverted ones are eradicated by the instrument which you direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More often a formica (insect) appears as a small, hairy or fistulous growth on the surface of the body, especially in the groin area, and when it touches that, it is said to be similar to the bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment of it is to take a hollow needle of peacock's feather or of vulture's feather, and make it strong, and place that over the formica until it encircles the area of the skin; and then revolve your hand around the needle until you insert what is in the circuit of the formica, and place that in the groin area of the flesh, and eradicate the formica from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make that with a needle of iron or of steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part beneath the hollow needle should be subtle, dull (not perforated), enveloped so that on the said part the absorption of it is abolished and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the formica according to what has been said previously in the chapter on cauterization of atheyl.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the shape of instruments that are administered to give crusts.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some ulcers are treated with crusts of silver or of gold or of iron fondue or molten; and some ulcers are treated with those small and large instruments according to those which are administered, because that which is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and of those whose wounds are fresh or dolorous, the crusts of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of large and few crusts:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the hollow needle beneath which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it should be distinguished at the point where the bag is tied, thus at times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the pus beneath, which is inserted into the anus, should be dull (not pointed) like a lion, with subtlety; and on one side of the groove there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track is according to the size of the rays and a large pus is small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of wool of sheep, and the root of it is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated by many small tracks, thus as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the tracks is very large.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those tracks a strong file of crude iron which is of many sharp points, or around those; and adjust to that the bag; and when it is placed in the body, it should be tightened at the head of the crust between two distinct and strong constriction points, and then cauterize on each track: More the quality of cauterizing on that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be resupinated on the two Siege, and elevate their legs up and place one cord above which already has holes or a lantern; and then anoint the extremity of the cauterizer with oil or album of Huou or mucilage of fenugrec or of similar things; and then insert that into the anus to facilitate, and then the minister takes the bag and extracts that in two masses and seven times with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine all that is in the crust; and then extract the crust and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to evacuate, hold it as much as you can; and if you sleep on that for a whole night, it is more direct in juvenation.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More if you cauterize that in the illnesses of solution of belly and evacuation of the intestine, then you iterate the cauterizer until it is sanctified.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are emorrhoids or apostemes of lenient nature, then the crust should be subtle and gentle, among the crusts which children are treated with.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the treatment of plagues what is convenient to the book, and I will say thus the treatment of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diversified according to whether they are caused by cold humors and according to the location on which they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many wounds are caused are cold humors, so it is also with a treatment of foot pain, or incision of the skin, or cutting of the vein, or percussion with a lancet, or with a needle, or with a scalpel, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Many wounds that are in the parts of the body are also like a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the cure of some wounds because it pauses that rational thinking and rule over the other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head wounds, for the remembrance of the compounded treatments will come to the beginning of the third capital chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when simple head wounds occur and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is due to foot pain or similar, and you have already trampled the code so much alone and it is a great wound and fears about that patient having apostema catch, then you should take away and remove the cephalic inflammation as soon as possible, and do not delay; and extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there is no prohibitive cause for removal, especially if the blood is exhausted from the wound, little by little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it is the removal of the contrary part of the wounded area; and beware of the patient's relapse and of vicious and coarse habits.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Many times, if a minor prohibition occurs, then it is diminished by the diet and does not approach to flesh nor to vices.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the wound, if it occurs with apostema catch, where it infuses in oil rose solute or in wine on which it is stipulated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Many times, if it is sure of apostema catch, then pause on the wound, if it is recently with healthy blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply little by little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then pause on the excessive ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Many times, if the wound is large or is due to incision of the skin and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust them with a suture according to how I recommend the suture of theirs.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Many times, if the wound is already discovered in the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by it except for a small suspension, then incise that and apply proper cure to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of the code, and command the patient to be moderate in vices in which there is grossness: take capsules and form a mixture similar to theirs, until it is compounded.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the code and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that purulent matter and evacuate it, and apply proper cure to it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Many times, if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which flows healthy blood that may come out, and it is not abscessed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find it not incised, then you incise it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if it is necessary to provoke what we have said does not conflict, then you cauterize until the blood is abscessed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; thus you powder on those with this powder, because consolidated then, so that the air does not change them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the preparation of the powder is this: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of non-extinct earth; let it be well-triturated and crushed, and of that, let the wound be filled, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it be on that adhering surface, and let it be coagulated with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply strength to that beneath the pustules and lift it up, and do not dislodge it while it is thus that it does not become apostematous, because it is not eradicated from it by medicine until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some wounds only require solute cautery, when it is not at your disposal in the present of olive oil and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And I do this medical operation on large wounds when it is convenient to pause over them and they are strengthened, and thus recent wounds with their healthy blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not intended for the position of this powder, but rather cure them with what we have said, thus you pause on those excessive ointments digesting, or you pause on those pores of the flour of the ordinary bread with water and honey until they get purification; and apply proper cure to them with another cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	More often it happens that a broken fracture in bone occurs, and it is small, then you extract what you have handled.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will teach you the treatment of fractures of the head in that which is coming.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the sores of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	More often the sore happens in the neck, then it is not different in medicine, and between the sore of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	More often the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is a nerve, it does not engender in the inguinal region but rather evades cure of the one who makes vehement strictures, thus like zinc and gypsum that seems veteran and similar to their quarrel, no other than the nerves and contradicts that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And it does not stop upon the sore for any total cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation to it is in the brain, which is the pus most high above all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is that which is cured by gentle medicines, thus like the cause washed with warm water, some infused oil in rose-water or non-rose-water, and thus when it is washed with warm water and other small pearls, minorant according to this manner, and gently humid.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	More often the sore is great, then administer a suture, or stitch the lips of it, and then care for that with powders entering until it be healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	More often the sore is deep or happens in the lowest part of the purification, then perforate that in the place most premiered.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	More often in the sore an artery is cut and a flow of blood is consequent, then separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessary to provoke to stop it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	More often you have cut the vertebrae of the gullet or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the codena with a suture over the cane of the gullet and do not touch that; afterwards equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and then strengthen that in a decent structure, and leave that for some days; and then care for that with gentle humidness in which there is strictness and excitement until it be healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	More often the sore is in the bone and has made an impression, then pierce that, and then if there are fragments of bones, extract all those that you can from them; and what you have not appareled, leave it until the sore closes itself, and it be separated and the edge of it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the sore is recent then powder over that with the powder which I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	More often in the sore a fistula is made, then cure that with water of which the remembrance will come to you properly in the following chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the sores of the neck or of similar ones that are made between the spine and are made with a span or with a knife or with a lance or with similar ones.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of a lance or of a knife, and sometimes of its depth, then consider more often if the sore has been venomously infected when the patient is in a bad state; then you will know that the sore is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the sore is recent in the healthy blood, then you stop in it of the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and helps the patient, more pause in it with gentle attraction, and dissolve that two times a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the gentle attraction is not present to you, then pause in the orrifici of the sore as much as possible so that it sucks out what is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps on the sore so that it runs what is in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	More often if the sore has passed three days or more and does not happen to the patient spasm nor tremor of bad heart nor stricture of wing, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the sore is saved; and then care for that with warm waters and another cure until it be healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	More often if the healing of it is excessive, and already all time is overcome, then you will know that a fistula has been made; care therefore for that according to the following chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the sore is by incision of a span or of a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with water that is preceded by suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	More often if it has made an impression in the bone, and then of it you cut out pieces, then you twist the sore and take care to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	More often if they are not separated, then leave them until the sore closes itself, that the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other sores accidentally happening in the other members, the treatment is the treatment of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From the wounds of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the belly is great, or small, or mediocre.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great many worn-out veins of the intestine or nerves of the intestine, because it is a faulty introduction of theirs and the suture of theirs being more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And the small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it seems that the reduction of theirs is more difficult, if you do not take care of their introduction to the right place at once, because it becomes inflamed and is grossly engrossed, making the instrument's entry difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the moderate disruption is better, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned beforehand.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And it is known that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are convenient for sutures of the other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures communicate with the other wounds, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each one an exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore it is said that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine appears for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has been inflamed by the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when it is so, then you should scald that in this way, that you submerge a humid sponge in lukewarm water only, or that you cook in boiling water, and cyperus, and spikenard, and embroilas, until the inflammation of the intestine is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some worn-out veins make it clear that in which they have stipulated, and it is better than lukewarm water alone for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which there are decoctions of altaea and malvas, because for that reason it alleviates the instrument's entry with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument's entry is excused by this cure, then it separates the disruption with a small instrument in which you have inserted emollients.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary cure is better, when it is properly done so that there is no setback, and there is no occupation to setback again with necessary defeat.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	About the instrument, see its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp-pointed, and the other part not-acute, and the extremity subtle, and not with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather it is obtuse a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the wound is amplified and is outside the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the natural form of it, in its own proper place, if it is possible about that, because better it is.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place their head and feet higher than the other parts below.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you place your attention and consideration at all times in this way so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is necessary that you administer this in great wounds and in moderate wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, place this that is prepared for you, and make it so that the minister is between your most skilled hands, which hold the disruption totally with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and thus uncover from that to whom it is necessary to suture some cause for another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and thus you leave the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and stretch the needle once, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the code, with two extremities of the ciphac which is below the code of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the code and two extremities of the ciphac, and so four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And thus you stretch with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some worn-out veins of two parts together, and thus add the two lips to the wound for decent addition; and thus leave the thickness of the finger and fix another needle there, and thus tie it with faith as it was tied with the first needle; and do not cease from doing this if it is necessary among the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And thus the moderate needles are between grosness and subtlety, because the subtle needles move with ease into the flesh; and the large ones are of difficult entry into the code, and therefore it is necessary that they be moderate in subtlety and grosness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	It is not suitable that the needle be fixed in both extremities of the spine, so that the flesh is not deeply incised and the wound does not hinder the consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	They should not be prolonged with suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not loosen the patient from his sleeping bed; and place pillows expanded on the entire affected part, which hold the extremities of the needles; and thus you will know that the wound has already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And in these species of suture with needles, it is more convenient to use them in small wounds, for you will need only one or two needles around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is common: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, of the spine and two extremities of the hip, at once, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that same part where it started, so that the thread retracts and comes out of the subcutaneous part to the wound, so that the suture is according to the suture of the fabric in which the fabrics are strongly stretched.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the amount of thickness of the little finger's mending.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And in this suture, wise men are knowledgeable.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture, I have often closed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his own belly, which had been wounded by a knife, and it was the disruption of a major wound of about a palm, and it was situated around two palms from the intestine in the middle place, and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have often reduced that swelling which the intestine had been outside the wound for 23 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in a space of 15 days or around, and I cured him and he is healthy; and then I visited him for many years, and he is converted into his own dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he could not be healed; and by a miracle it was done, for I did not heal him with an ointment, because it was in a place where ointments were not effective nor any medicine, but I placed a compress on the wound for many days and nights, and I washed assiduously with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Moreover, I will describe two species of proper suture according to the narration of Pareula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the spine, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates into the spine and in that same place it is rectified according to the straightness and length of the entire body, and there is the extremity of the hip where you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the thigh.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And thus when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another time in the same extremity of the thigh from the front part to the back part; and there is the extremity of the hip which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate to that point your penetration, which you make penetrate into the hip in the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part of him within, so that all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin with this same method and sew up the extremity which is of the hip on the other side, and extract the needle from the spine that penetrated, and then return it to the spine and fix the extremity of the hip which is on the other side in this same extremity of the mirror; and extract it from the spine which is part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do it one time and another, and do it one time then another time until you sew up all that is before according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew up the skin with the suture in which you sew up the skins, thus that you sew up the hip one time from the part of the extremity of the spine, and then leave it another time until it is completely healed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Moreover, the second species of proper suture is that which Gualia recommends, and this is to be done with sermons and for his recommendation, it is that you sew up according to similarity in which some doctors sew up, thus that they add all the part to its comparable part according to natural convenience; and apply the extremity of one to the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of him, and this is done according to what I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is fitting that you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own front part, and make it penetrate to the back part on that sole, and leave the two extremities of the hip; and then revolve the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in the two extremities of the hip.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then return those bladders, and make them penetrate certain parts of the divided dentition entering into the part before in two extreme mirrors of the other side that is not in the opposite lateral.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common ligature, and it is a suture about which preceding memorization.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the serum of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And the dissector Alcus, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce into these a filament, and begin with an introduction of a needle of water that is what you need, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those which sew up the hollowed-out veins.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when disruption is in the middle location of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than those of other locations of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medicinal treatment of plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	This cause is because when you constrict the recent plague with a holy blessing, then the air alters it, and reduces the intestine and sews it up decently, then pause over that incarnative powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that needle that sews up the ones which are present within so they make hard and strong tissue, and thus consolidate the ciphac and mirat; and then cure it in this way as is the cure of the other plagues within so it may be healthy.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that instrument, because it begins to take hold quickly, very well, and exchanges those two veins of the day, thus as you and instruct, within so it may be healthy, because you do not need another medicine in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague communicates to the principal members, then cover that you submerge the woolen thread in oil of tremulous quality, or in oil of rose, and pause it in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and the joints.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the holy veins, because many veins are ending there, then crystallize that vein with a black stippling tube, and majorly if the purification is pervading the vein and making an exiting penetration into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that the one which is of the large intestine is of less ligature sanity than the one which is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult sanity because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive sanity from plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and due to its magnitude, and due to the subtlety of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the process of the plague is the fabric, and you obtain that recently, reduce it according to your correct treatment with which you reduce the intestines harmoniously.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the space and already is green or black, then that you stretch it with a filament over the place that is denigrated of it, so that healthy fluxes come, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then you inscribe what is another ligament, and pause two extreme filaments pending from the part below the plague outside of it, so that on your part may be alleviated the attraction of it which needs the cauterization of the fabric and emission of the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some homes, thus because you saw that which was afflicted in the holy belly with percussion of the lance and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus from its governance and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you think about the cure of it, that is, that it was not confused in its sanity, but rather you continue to make it more subtle until it is healthy and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you then saw that the place was consolidated, and you thought about the patient who suffered an evil accident in the holy belly; and you did not find any remedy for that evil accident and remained in their many dispositions mangling and lamenting, and then you entered into a bath and exercised in its uses.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And you experimented with many experienced remedies that when plague occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then cover that it is bound according to this manner: and it is that you take fragments of large capsules; and then adjust the two labial lips of the plague and pause a fragment of those that have the open mouth over the two labial lips of the plague; thus when you take hold of them and stretch their mouth, you remove the head of it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then pause another fragment of the primary shape, and do not cease until you make fragments of one according to the quantity of all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return the pillow and clothing; and remove those adjacent caps from the intestine inward so that the intestine may be healthy; and do not hinder the patient from recovering.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the intestine may be lifted with a subtle thread which is made from the intestine of a beast annexed to it, since it is in the vein; and you should take the extremity of this thread of intestine, and make it not too fleshy, and return it to its place in the vein, wrapped, and return that thread into the vein and body, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suturing is not based on anything except the way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not only subtle, and there is no healing of the whole.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every wound and abscess, when they become inflamed and old, is called an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and healed for a long time, and does not dry up, then, in whatever member it may be, it is universally named fistula and we call it that abyss.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is a nodulous, hard, white swelling which does not hurt and in which there is a cavity, just as it is conquered by pain of the same kind; and thus it is named an ulcerative abscess, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in a moist wound which heals slowly; and for this reason the moisture is dried up in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some of these moistures are thick, and they are few, and they are coarse, and they are subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already stated in the division, then, when you said those wounds, that every ulcer which is not healthy nor is it in naked flesh, is not for anything except one of these causes: either because of little blood in the body; or because of bad will; or because between the flesh and the lips is hard, prohibiting the nativity of flesh; or because it is from thick legation; or because that ulcer in itself is putrid and the matter that is transmitted to it is of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient for its cure; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is pestilential; or due to the property of the region, just as it happens in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of maladies is made, and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is a bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Now I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and their cures with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is fitting that you know how to make the cure of fistula, which is done by way of operation with hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for some of them are fistulas that penetrate to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and some of them are those that give proximity to the principal member and similarity.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so those of these fistulas that are according to this manner are among the maladies of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is trouble and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas at a depth which does not penetrate to those places that I have said, and you hope and confide in its cure, and want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with fire, and if the fistula goes according to rectitude, and you acquire it with hand.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle point of lead, because lead in the elevation of the dry body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has many horrible things, it is not possible for you to signify about it with hand.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then crystallize the horrific things for their horrific things, because the moisture through which you crystallize it goes away from the other horrific things and corrects them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and it is the conquest of the long-standing or propounded fistula, or it is a fistula in which there are many horrific things and this is about all your strength, with your entry into the wound, with which you enter the malady, and the invention of pain away from your compression on the hand over the place, and similarity of signs and accidental causes to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And since you have stood upon all those causes in the station of truth, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula close or in a salty place, far from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which you have said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you touch the fistula according to what is said in the narration of it, and observe that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the orifice of the flesh, or of the ulcer and of similar things, and cure that within so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Perhaps the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is according to rectitude, then you should cover that in the preon as much as possible, and thoroughly cleanse that of all its corrupted flesh; and administer well-enveloped medicines acutely, and introduce them within the cavity of the fistula, which has comprehended with bitter ferocity.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that the sharp points are inserted so that the acute medicine corrodes all that which is rough in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it by applying those that generate healthy flesh within, so that it may be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Perhaps if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Perhaps the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to certify that, then you should investigate it and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and blackness, then you should scrape that within so that the corruption may be wholly removed; and then take care to enshrine it with what will make it healthy.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healthy and throws out arm thus as it was doing, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again secondarily and exquisitely the reason for it and the purification of it with the last strong fortification, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the profound depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you do nothing but leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible to extract it, then you should extract it with subtle forceps that are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you should exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and from those you should not leave any cause in your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Perhaps if you have made opposition to some cause of the humors, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then you should incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and extract the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Perhaps if you have not prepared to remove the bones of your hour, then pause over the plague that pierces the plague there, and leave it within so that it is in the environment of those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague being consolidated, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Meanwhile, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone in the above-mentioned oil, or submerged bone in Egyptian anguent, or in some of the green vertebrae, because when they pierce those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their abduction, and from those attractions is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Perhaps it is a large bone thus as the bone of the chamber or of the thigh or similar to those, and what of it is corrupted is the face of it only so much, then scrape that with resolution thus only in the end so that the blackness and corruption may be removed, and then restore the plague.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Perhaps what of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and to incise all within the place where the corruption has penetrated, and then take care to consolidate it.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you endeavor to go to a man in his thigh for that pauses it and helps and assists over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of around thirty years, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and from the divided parts it is evident that the matter has gone into the body so that the matter has penetrated the thigh, and it is a matter of abscess in a great abscess, and I do not find an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I found extended time in that for the error of the doctors so that the abscess was opened, and I gathered the motive matters, and its cure was then paused until the thigh was fistulated, and they were in the motive orifices which all had poured forth pus and humors from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors were consulted for around two years, and I did not find in those wise men any knowledge of the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the thigh of it and the matters that flowed from it through those orifices for a great body; and already the body of that man was wholly stabilized and the color of it was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices and penetrated the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And you have examined and scrutinized all the openings and thoroughly investigated those that come from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Then you have touched and felt inside one of the openings that enter to reveal a part of the bone, and you have probed that corrupt and rotten place, and it was already decayed and rotten and blackened; and it was already corrupted a part of the leg that had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then you have cleared away what was covering the exposed bone and prepared it.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you have cut away that which was not of the bone but rather that corruption which you had uncovered and cleared away, and you have already destroyed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then you halted the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you have iterated and uncovered the bone again according to the primary discovery, and you found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And cleared away what seemed to come from that corruption, and then you have tried to make a perforation to cure it and restore it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discovered it again on the other side and didn't cease to incise the small bone little by little particularly and perforate for its restoration, but it was not restored until you incised around a palm of it, and that extracted marrow from it, and then you restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated gradually and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on it and to section it except for the disposal of its fluid and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it will hasten in all hours to overflow with bad evacuation synchronously.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so it is healed entirely, and there is nothing in the place of hard flesh; and it is well done the disposal of it in its own body and returned its strength to it; and it is converted into its own dispositions and does not oppose ambulation nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already traversed, then it is necessary that you section it according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen that in the extremity of that eminent bone, and command it to extend itself into its own; and pause that ligament of wool which is thicker than the primary ligament; and then tie it over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts below, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause or place a table below the bone decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to saw without sectioning the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the sawing be on the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces the sawing from the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, before it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts entirely; and then pause below, and then saw that from the primary part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing is according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in its ingenuity.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the thickness of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you grasp that, and modify that according to each disposition which is possible for you, and in case something ingenious can be rectified for you, when it does not do contrary to your vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know that the incisions and saws to incise these bones are very subtle according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so it is necessary that you prepare a total species of operation and convenient instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation means to you about the species of instrument which you need; when you have great study and long experience with knowledge of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of illnesses, because then you had them for your metrics, which is convenient to all maladies.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you have formed in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with, as simples as those which proceed to your prohibition, which you experimented on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of sawing:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another sawing:
Forma de autra serra:	Another type of serration:
Forma de autra serra gran:	A larger form of another serration:
Forma de ray:	Form of a stripe:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this stripe is according to the form of the head of a star-shaped claw, and its points are according to the form of the points of a steely instrument.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable unless you confound those heads with the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide opening.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor among others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another decently made serration: it is made with an arched curve and the sharpness of its iron, and the member of its handle is decently made in a descending manner.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a lancet:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor with which the bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a stripe, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a stripe that is suitable for a ratio of those that are perforated by the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and similarly it covers all the causes that we have mentioned about razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	About incision extremities and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption worsens and the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it is necessary to incise that member within that honor, so that the evil may escape through the mouth of the corruption, because the malady would flee from death or from great damage to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that one to which it happens, is that the member becomes black within until it is understood that fire has already burned, or it weakens next to the blackness until the weakness reaches that member which is his and takes all the body; and thus you should make an incision of that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it is a cause of corruption from venomous blows, such as those of the sea scorpion or of the viper or of the rhutel and of similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not spread to the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you incise that from the root of the finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the finger of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you surround that, then incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause in cure is to quantity the virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, it happens to the foot when corruption surrounds the toe of the foot, then you incise that up to one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the skin of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Moreover, if it reaches into the ankle, then you incise the leg up to the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the ankle, then in that case it is not possible to cure it except by dismissing (it) and leaving the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or of sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part below where you want to incise, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, even spacing them apart until all the flesh is discovered; and then it is incised or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to place a bandage on all parts so that it does not touch the area, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and the abscess is cauterized with caution.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Moreover, if there is flux of blood when it works, then you cauterize the touched area carefully, or place above it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the injured member with a ligament at a convenient time, and cure it until it is healthy.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his sick foot, this meets with an accident which you and I have recommended, which is to burn the blackness in the sick foot with adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That corruption occurs primarily in the dry season when the whole foot tends to be affected.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself to receive the treatment with anxiety, going to the member with vehemence of his, which attracts more pain and distress of his, and he incidentally puts his foot into the joint, and it becomes healthy.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, that corruption occurred in the hand of the mother indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and I thoroughly performed the removal of that superfluity on the hand of the medicines, with the purification of his body; and not being receptive to the superfluity, it began to go into the other joint until it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the patient asked me to inject his hand, and I did not want to do so, fearing the repercussions of that superfluity, and more than anything I feared the injection of the dead hand, because the virtue of the malady was above suspicion.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it happened to me that the man prepared and injected his entire hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration except to be an aid concerning that which is said about this disease, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the treatment of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses occur in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and it is evacuated from him, and one clears the area where it was like a vase, and the cord that is above him like a subtle drapery, and no posterior corruption is generated, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption begins in some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is that one injects the entire cord thus as it is revolved, and mainly when it is subtle and made like a drapery, and they fix it so that it does not adhere to the area for its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you fear that the cord will adhere and that corruption will not have been achieved by posterior consequence, and on the cord has passed away from the face, then you treat that member with aclyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you have is of fetid odor, then youclysterize that member with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and vinegar and zinc, and receiving equal parts, and they are adjusted in a vase, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine is made red and penetrates to the specific melancholy.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from him what is necessary and dissolves the member in water and honey; and clysterize that member into the sinus, and strengthen its orifice, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that member with precision; and do so for many days until the sinus is purified and the putridity is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some vegetables are clysterized with water of cinders, when you do not have this medicine present; and it is that you take the ash of vitriol, and mix it with the water; and then collect that and clysterize that member into it until you confirm that the sinus is then cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the disease has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of ash, then clysterize that member with water and honey mixed with zinc trissat, and clysterize that member with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the wine makes adhere to the sinus, and mainly when in the wine there has been an excess of sweetness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this with some vegetables and you confirm that the sinus is already cleared, then clysterize that member with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take from the Greek dyaphinicon and dissolve that member in oil of rose and wine stipid; or that you clysterize that member with some medicines and other Greek things that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on Greek things.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is straitened in which the cannula of the clyster cannot be received, then you amplify that member by ferrum little by little, and pause in the warm water enveloped in Egyptian medicine or in basilicon medicine until it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is ample, then you join the lips of that member by suture and leave a quantity of it in which the clyster is added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of that which flows to the arm is elevated to the superior parts, then dry it in the pus below the place where it is in the arm, so that the arm may flow into it, because when the arm is constricted at the entrance of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to extract the sinus into the outer environment of the bone, then perforate in preparation for the limb, so that the leg can be treated according to what appears and what does not remain in the retained cause of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidative medicines that are placed on the convenient sinus, suitable for what you want to extract from the liquid.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the liquid is of such great quantity that it makes communication with all of the sinus; and then insert the forceps into the right orifice of the sinus through a wide tube, and then extend over another liquid of the same quantity as the tube, and pause it on that position for a long time at the orifice of the sinus so that the arm's evacuation is alleviated and the large liquid does not obstruct except to insert it one day.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	That which is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains there for a whole hour so that it can extract what is adjusted in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to know if what comes out of the arm is much or little, whether it is digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And thus you should consider the place of that sinus, if the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is gathered above the orifice of the sinus is adhering, or it is proper adherence, then you may dissolve it on the third day, and when you dissolve the plague, then change the liquid for another and renew the poultice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it will be proper, because some homes are in those which delay the generation of flesh in those plague wounds, and of those which are done contrary to them.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus is motionless for many days and the arm is indigested, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dry also as a poultice of diffusion, when it is above the adjusted superfluity of addition of zeal.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last thing that is cured, it is that you take a poultice of diffusion and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on the area where you previously applied the poultice, and thus comfort that member, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, poultice of diffusion, but rather it is contained within so that it is gross, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them, and sprinkle everything and powder over the gross thing that is under the focus, and thus line up over the liquid and strengthen it over the sinus; and thus line up over the gross thing that has been contained within so that it is gross, and powder over the liquid and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times it is administered in the long aristology and roots of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and powder of errors and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, sprinkle them and powder over the gross thing that has been recommended; and thus use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the prono of it, and it has made inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you should treat it with a fistular cure, as has been said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the cure of gouty hands and worn-out nails and incision of toes added to the section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Gouty hands are an abscess that usually occurs on the finger or toe of the hand or foot, and it often spreads to other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less considered, or it is an abscess of a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and it throws out arm inside so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all, and it pierces through to the bone inside so that it is at the fetid odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that on hand which we have said in the division and does not conform to your cure, then it is necessary that you insert iron throughout the entire superfluity that has remained from the nail and cauterize the plague properly, because the cautery is not juvenile in this way.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, and the additions of the nail are already comprehending the flesh at the divided parts, and they begin to pain and lead thus, then it is necessary that you pause a subtle ray below the angle of the nail that pains the flesh, and impel it under and insert it into the flesh to facilitate, and pause over what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines that burn within so that it may be totally removed; and thus cure that which is gathered within so that it may be healthy.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	Most often if corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to cut into the bone and extract it, for there is no time when a corrupted bone will heal itself.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if corrosion and decay are in the finger, then you cut into it according to the preceding memory, and afterwards heal the inside so that it will be healthy.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	Most often if there is an ingrown nail or attiture, and it causes vehement pain, then it is necessary to begin by removing the flesh of the affected part, and afterwards cut around the nail with a transverse section from below upwards, and be careful that the section does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you aggravate the affected part's vehement pain, and it will cause superfluous nativity of the adjusted flesh in the area; and then heal the area with water that stops the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Most often it is adjusted, which is born in the hands of many men, since they are entirely flesh, and entirely in their bones, or entirely in their fingers.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And many of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the nativity of them in many joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Most often that which is born in many joints of the finger does not become bad, and this which is born in the strong joints is not much afflicted.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the section is easier, and it is necessary to cut into its root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Most often of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its amputation.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Most often in that which is born in the finger with its nails, it is necessary to cut from the beginning the flesh of the affected part around the bone, and then saw with one of those convenient saws suitable for that, and afterwards heal the inside so that it will be healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Most often consolidation occurs when the fingers are held among warm wraps or due to nativity of the man who was injured, or due to consolidation from plague or combustion by fire, or by semblance; therefore it is necessary to cut out that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And afterwards pause between the drapes of the enfused oils roasting so that they are not consolidated easily, and separate them among those, or pause among those a thin layer of lead until it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in many fingers on the palm, then you cut out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of cutting into veins, they are variable.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are variable, and so are enveloped gross veins full of superfluous melancholic humors which come into the members of the body, and the greatest incident of them is in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it is necessary to administer purification of the body from black bile with certain warm wraps for strong expulsion, and afterwards bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Most often the cure of iron poisoning is in two ways: one is that it is cut into and the black blood is attracted, and the other way is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of it is according to this way: begin by pouring warm water into the affected leg until the gross blood is resolved, which is filthy in the leg, and afterwards strengthen the affected leg at the upper part above the thigh towards the lower part of the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide section, and afterwards elevate the black blood to the highest point above the affected leg, from top to bottom, until the amount of blood that you want is released, and which tolerates the virtue of the affected part.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then leave it, and command to him that he abstains from black bile-inducing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and water does not benefit the affected part.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Most often the elevation of them is according to this way: you raise the affected leg, if there are many pels in it, and then place it in a bath and pour warm water into the affected leg until it becomes swollen and the veins are extremely full; or exercise strongly, if a bath is not present at hand, until the member is scaled.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord in the right of the vein for sectioning in the loin or in the back of the affected part near the knee, or at the lowest part of the affected part near the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then uncover the cord with an incision and excavate the vein of the entire affected part until it appears to the sense, and it is necessary for the appearance of that which often declines into blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore when you evacuate and of the cord, you often find that white thread which was a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that finger inside so it is elevated and separated from the spine, and suspend it in an inclined position with a golden hook.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then you section another section, and then you section that section for three digits, and then you scrape the spine of the affected part below the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then you elevate it and insert it into the rear section of the heel, and then you extract it and elevate it until it is guided by the second section, and then you extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And make it so that you extract it from the section that is above or below all the sections, until everything is guided; and then you insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it up and extract it, or insert the finger into the radius and turn your hand to all parts until it is set.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate the limb and it will come back over the patient's thigh through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the whole limb is reset, then pause over the place of the hidden wound, anointed with wine and oil, and rubbed and not-rubbed, and cure it until it is healthy.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if life is opposed to having twisted the wrapping around the parts, and it is not according to the rectitude according to what we have said, then be careful that you bind over that entire twisting of it and the places of its wrapping, and then suspend it with an uncircumcised band until it elevates the whole.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware of your section that you do not insert the vein and that you do not harm it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incident is one which has cut off life:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of an uncircumcised operation:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to the one who is circumcised thus with uncircumcised ones nor of acute extremity so that they do not harm the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would insert into the vein by its subtlety; having been in superfluous grossness thus as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of a varicose vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs on dry and cold lands, just like in the land of the Arabs and in the dry and arid lands of few fertility, where there are neither herbs nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is often generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gesture of it is of putrefaction that you see below the spine, just as venomous dents are piercing the body, and serpents and worms and vipers are generating between the spine and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the suspicion of the advent of it is from this vein that suddenly inflames the leg with vehement inflammation; and then the place becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that blistering, which seems to resemble a plant's root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then it appears from there the extremity, then you will be covered with a piece of lead weighing as much as the weight of a denarius, between two denarii, and place that suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as the flow of it comes from some cause to the affected parts before, wrap it in lead and apply it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the motion is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not insert it by root until it is fully guided, because if you insert it, it is opposed and enters into the flesh and causes apostema and putrefaction in the place and ulceration badly.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and be extracted little by little, until it is fully removed from the back of it and no remainder of it stays in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein it is said that it is in some men who are in its length of 5 palms and of digits, and already it has reached me that it is one of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then insert the radius into the channel of it and perforate it with a long channel in the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medications; and then cure it by curing apostemas.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many ramifications, and it increases especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its many horrific roots, and it is said that each horrific root.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure it thus as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the section of worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some land as our bovine disease because many ramifications end in the veins and it is a worm that is born between the spine and the flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, destroying and weakening, and shows the sentiment of the sick animal from member to member until it dismembers the spine and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, thus causing an accumulation of worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and reaches the head, and pervades the whole, then it strengthens the ulcers in it and destroys the whole, and thus produces many evils.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then you cannot do so unless you have the certain ambulation and application of it to the sentiment, and thus you perceive that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with ligament and constriction, and then you dry above it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it has penetrated into the flesh and does not come out, then you apply a cautery iron to the spot within where it hurts, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the flesh with which it corrupts the spot as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Perhaps you have sometimes experienced it pervading the head near the belly, then strengthen above the eyebrow with a strong structure, and then dry above it, and extract it; and know that the patient uses a remedy of evacuation from the bad body with evacuating medicines that expel putrid humors, and beware of foods generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	About the treatment of ague fever.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This sickness is named ague fever in our land, and it is the pain that appears in certain members, and then spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that according to what I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been rubbed for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away like a worm disappearing, more quickly than it would have been possible, as if it were silver, I saw when it was cleared from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved from that place and fixed itself in the muscle, and then I stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I ran to the other side of the body until I reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the whole body according to what I had seen; and I was very marvelled at the permutation of it and at the velocity of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that in my own veins, according to that manner, although I had not seen many of those which are painful being permuted from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it in my veins as it was in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was that, but because the woman was old, with dry body and uncovered veins, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that permutated wickedness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward curvature in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with veins that are weakened.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear at the vein as we have said, then you strengthen above it and let it be loosened gently and dried above it until that wickedness is driven out, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not have those good veins, then you cure it with evacuation of the body and with that which expels wickedness, and cleanse those foul pills and those of serpent-like appearance.
De extraccio de sagetas.	About the extraction of arrowheads.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrowheads are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they occur, because their diversity is that of those that have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and rough ones, so they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have aster-like shapes.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the wounds in which they occur is according to two manners: because the members or principal members are concave, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, and bladder, and their similar ones; and then when you cut into one of these members and appear to sense death, which cause I recommend to you, then you know that you should avoid extracting that arrowhead from those in which death is most disposed, and when you do not appear with those bad senses, and the arrowhead is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the senses of the brain it is when you cut into the arrowhead, and pierce the bone, and it is situated in the cypress-like place which is above the brain, because it accedes to the vehement pain, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the veins, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and very strongly the speech is abolished and the voice is destroyed, and it is situated in the place of the plague humid whiteness resembling palsy, and you see it similar to being affected by the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so it appears to you in this sign, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the blood, if it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Perhaps the signs of the blood when it falls in the heart, so that it is close to the mamilla on the left side, and it feels as if it were fixed by a hard cause, and not a vain cause; and the movement of the blood seems similar to the movement of the pulse, and it corrects the plague of black fever, and it knows that coldness of the extremities, and dry fever, and syncope; and so you know that death descends all at once.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the blood has infected the lung so it expectorates bloody spumous phlegm of the plague, and the veins that are close to the neck so apostematize, and the color of the patient is changed, and it expels great spirit, and demands attraction of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the blood falls in the veil that is on the chest, and the pain then is close to the small ribs, and it makes great anger and vehemence with a great sigh, and not all the members of the muscles are numb.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the blood falls in the stomach, then it strongly affects the eyes of the plague with some indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the blood falls in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, eyes some fissure of the plague, or the web, or hernia that is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure by extraction of the blood.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the blood falls in the bladder, and it is excreted before urine, and it processes some cause to the parts before, and it strongly affects the pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Perhaps the other members are like the face, the neck, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the adjutants, and the vertebrae of the back, and the fork, and the hip, and the leg, and their similarity to the members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the blood does not attract vein or artery and it is not venomous blood.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these bloods, so that they signify something about your cure, tied to it.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is, because in one case the blood fell into the lacrimal duct of his eye, and I extracted it from the other part, leaving the gray matter of the aurelia, and it was healthy, and did not happen in the eye of the document.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another blood from a Jew whose blood fell into his eye, behind the eyelid and it was hidden and not obtained from there except for a small extremity that adhered to the wooden stick, and it was a great blood of the sharp bloods of the Turks, like a iron nail in which there were no aurelia.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healthy, and it did not happen to his eye bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another blood from a Christian whose blood had fallen into the gullet, and it was Arabic blood, and it was that which had aurelia; and then I wrote about that between two guides, and it was submerged in his gullet; and then I subtly examined that, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healthy.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another blood from a man whose blood had fallen into his abdominal cavity, and I thought he would die from that; and then, since he passed thirty days and did not change regarding any cause of his dispositions, I wrote about the blood and engaged with it, and he was healthy, and no bad accident happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom a blood fell on his back, and the plague was consolidated over him, and since he received proper care for seven years, the blood was extracted from the root of the hip.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom blood fell into her abdominal cavity, and the plague was consolidated within her, and it did not change in her dispositions, and the woman did not attract document in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom blood fell on his face and the plague was consolidated, and it broke out the blood, not attracting much pain, and many signs similar to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the blood of the man of the prince's men who had fallen into the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right part a little, and all the blood was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to cure him by properly treating the fall of the blood within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I attracted the plague of the blood very strongly; and then I inquired into that with a subtle intent, and did not feel it; but I felt it a little behind the aurelia on the right, and then I suspected that the puncture was due to the extremity of the blood.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plastered the place where I had placed an attractive and digestive application, trusting that the place would be affected by me so that it appears to me as the place of the blood, so that it succeeds over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not touch the affected area significantly where the arrow has already reached; and you will continue to apply the plaster over it for many days without touching the accident; and consolidated is the wound meanwhile, and removed the patient from the extension of it for many days within which a day feels the arrow in his own blood and recognizes that I am a doctor.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you will apply the acute corrosive medicine over the wound for many days until it opens, and meanwhile you will assess that, and you will treat the subtle extremity of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you will adjust in the aperture of the wound for that acute medicine until it appears to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and I will take my time about that for the space of time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then because the wound has become amplified, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I will remove that, and do not obey the symptoms, then you will no longer subtly and ingeniously work on that in many ways of engineering, until you start a day on that in many ways of engineering, hanging them down with forceps descending slowly, according to how you will find the form of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract that; and then you will restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you will restore that and the wound is consolidated, and it is healthy for complete sanitation, and it does not become inflamed in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And you will recommend to you the quality of extraction of certain arrows for which pauses that rule and significance about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans know how to compare little about much; and I am what is present about what is absent; and they find new operation and novel instrument, which descends from the external causes of the art when they are accelerated.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore you say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by contrast with the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is forgotten by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy place, and it is attracted and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the symptoms of the hour when it hurts, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes tender, and its attraction and egression are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is fixed in bone and you do not obey the symptoms, then leave that for some days and try that with attraction and movement on any day, and already it is forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey the symptoms for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the entire part with subtle travel until the place is amplified by the arrow, and then extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and has proceeded into one of the vents of the brain, and appears to the patient some of those accidents that you have said, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave it until the blood is equalized for some days; because if the arrow reaches the cephalic, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not fixed but only in the body of the bone alone and does not pass into the cephalic, and you keep the patient for some days, and it does not become inflamed from any cause of those accidents, then you will engineer in the attraction of the arrow and in the attraction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Maybe it is much fixed and you do not obey the extraction, then you will administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and then cure the place until it is healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Maybe the arrow is already embedded in the place of the body, and it is embedded in the sentiment, then you will inquire about that tentatively, and if you feel that, then you will attract that with some instruments which are convenient for the attraction of it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the instrument, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you will feel over the wound until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the instruments which are held, then you will deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from the entire part with all the ingenuity that you can do; and engineer about that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in twisting of those until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you will use your hand with forceps at all parts until it obeys; and subtly use dereliction of subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot stand on that hour of yours, then you will lie down for some days until the parts that are in your circuit can be purified, and then return to that hour when it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Perhaps you have made a contrary flow of blood, then you will administer what we have said about the cure in the seventh chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And look at your virtue of incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer ingeniously in every manner possible to avoid the eviction of the sagitta; and do this so that you facilitate and tranquillize and slow down and firm up, thus as you are recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then make counter-figures to the sagitta so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you will remove the bad humour from them, because it is more jovial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Perhaps that is not possible for you, then you will administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Perhaps the sagittae that are forgotten for the contrary of another party, or that already proceed from some party outside, or have made gibbosity on the extremity of the sagitta by sentiment of the party above the codena propenda and several times that eminent; then you will section about that; and let it be the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then return to that, because it is made lighter for easier removal.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Perhaps it is retained in the bone, then you will twist the lame according to counter-pressure until the sagitta penetrates into the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And so, you will lie down for some days, and then return to that until you are cured.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the foundation of the sagitta is in that, then you will impel that into the bone.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Perhaps the foundation has fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you will introduce that into it, if it is dull, stir with caution so that it enters the concavity of the bone in the cavity of the sagitta and then impel that into the bone.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Perhaps the sagitta is concave, then you will impel that into the bone with strong stirring entering into it, because the sagitta is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the sagitta is intoxicated, then you will hollow out all the flesh in which it is true, if it is possible for you, and then cure that with what is convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the sagitta falls in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is near so that you touch that with the tent, and it is possible for you to section about that, then section about that and beware of incision of vein or nerve, and extract that, and then heal the wound if it is indigent, and cure that until it is healthy.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of forceps are those which are adapted to attract the sagittae:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Thus the extremities of theirs are like the beak of a bird which are made sharp when they take hold of the sagitta so that it does not escape.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are made many special types, large, small, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the greatness of the sagitta and of the small weakness, and of the amplitude of the wound, and of the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of the impelling caution with this concave extremity is thus like the beak of a bird so that it alleviates the intrusion of the sagitta into the bone, and impulsates that dullness.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The form of the impelling instrument with a dull extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	thus like a radius so that it alleviates the intrusion of it into the concave sagitta and is impelled into that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On the flebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of flebotomy, which are customary to flebotomize thus... of those that are in chapter 16. there are two pulsatile veins which are near the aurelia, it is said by Galen; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guide veins that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Perhaps the veins that are flebotomized in the arms are thus. because among those is a cephalic, and it comes from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is dull, and it is a medium-sized vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of all the body", and the basilica is a vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and is named "citillar", and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and it is the end of the arm, and it is placed above the focus, and it is that which appears above the pulse for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein which is between the aforementioned auricular and the small digit, and so in the two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is beneath the curvature of the thigh of the wild beast; and the second is subtle, and in its place it is beneath the leg of the domestic beast; and the sciatic vein, and in its place it is beneath the leg of the wild beast; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youthful vigor of the veins that are near the ears is affected by chronic and migratory and saharatic and ulcerous evils of the bad old head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding from those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that it should be near the head of the patient, and it should be rubbed on the head of the patient in the occiput, where both veins are found in a good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck with a bandage around so that both ears appear near the temples of the head; and if you feel the pulse of those in the said digit, and if you sense the pole of those in the said digit, here it will be tense.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then introduce it beneath the vein in the codeina so that the flebotomy comes out at the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand on the vein and codeina to the separated parts above and incise the vein in an incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two digits adjusted or around that; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen with poultices and apply it to the wound so that it may be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the youthful vigor of phlebotomy is an ancient and evil migratory and sorrowful and chronic eye disease and a body full of acute overflowing fluids towards the heels.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck with a motive towards making both veins apparent at the sentiment for manifest perception and demonstrate the pulse of those in the said digit; and then you will sense it tense.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then lift the codeina above the vein to the separated parts above in the said digit indicated, and introduce phlebotomy incidentally beneath, and lift the vein upwards; and incise it thus as you have done on the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause for an hour on the vein with the digit, and then pause above that spot with poultices and strengthen it from above with a strong constriction, and apply it so that it may be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now I have preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so the youthful vigor of phlebotomy on the vein of the forehead is near to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient evils of the face and migratory and rough and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what I recommend to you; thus it is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage around so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is the form of it:.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause at the prominent point which is at the head of the fossor above that vein and percuss on it with a pin or another cause in the manner of it, and make the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it so that it may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened in phlebotomy at a distance, however it is not covered that phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus as the other phlebotomies, except it is of lazy extremity, and phlebotomize it according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strongly supports the tendons in it when the phlebotomy is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More of the youthful vigor of the two veins that are in the lacrimal ducts of two heels for scabbing of the heels due to roughness and sebum in the heels, and at the evils of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you stand still above the head of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And it is done the phlebotomy according to the transverse at a length of a little in phlebotomy a little, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly the extremity of it is torn.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then make the blood flow as much as you need, and pause above that spot, and strengthen it for a night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More of the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conducive to acute fever and violent sweat, and at the evils of the face and migratory roughness that occur in the face, and it worsens when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the flebotomy of the patient is that the patient's vein strengthens the blood and you will take the subtle flebotomy instrument in your left hand, and place it at the correct location on the nose bridge according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the sentiment here, and because the blood starts to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover that you ultimately hold your hand on the small flebotomy instrument little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it there for a new night, because it is restored lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Moreover, the juice of the flebotomy of the two guiding guides constrains the flow and begins to expel the leprous matter and many evil humors and corrupt ulcers, also with herpetic wounds.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the flebotomy of those is that the patient strengthens below each one in the blood with a lien; and it is the artificial application on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then flebotomize the vein at length with a small flebotomy instrument little by little; and then extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what times of need that is added to it; and then make it resemble the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then dissolve the lien and strengthen the two veins with a mild stricture so that the patient is not overwhelmed, and lay it in the mattress because the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the juice of the flebotomy of the Algerich veins confers small apostemes and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and evil ulcers and fissures, and to evil ulcers that are in the nose and in their circle.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the flebotomy of those is that you make the patient cease within you, and strengthen their neck with a bandage, and then revolve their lips and regard the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of the two, and it is more because in the circle of those small black veins; and then you will insert each one for a sudden insertion.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Moreover, if you have doubts below you, and do not know which one of those is, then you will attend to the insertion of the larger one of those, and of the most manifest pustule of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make them resemble the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Moreover, it is customary to correct by inserting the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Moreover, of the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice is to apply the flebotomy of the cephalic to prevent those that are in the throat, to the evil of the uvula, and to evils of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of flebotomizing those is that it follows the patient between your hands within the sun, and raises their tongue, and regards below the tongue, on one side of their vein and on the other side of their vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then flebotomize each one; and beware that you do not ultimately hold your hand on the flebotomy instrument for those, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are flebotomized in the body are those which usually correct in all homes, and the flebotomy of theirs is done according to two manners, or they put on the flebotomy instrument miraculously or with olive oil at subtlety declining; or they section with the flebotomy instrument cuticularly, and apply it skillfully, and this is their form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this skillfulness is that it converges to section and of those specific sides subtly according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the stricture of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of miraculous flebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is the side of it also with times, and converges to open the concave full veins apparently gross, and to those that contain gross turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomy is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and converges to a flebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle citrine blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Moreover, the juice of the flebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood of the evils that are below the throat and neck, and of what descends to the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it converges to the flebotomizer, when flebotomizing that one, that he should beware of that and be above-trembling on that, because below it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy instrument, he will insert that artery and cause fluxes of blood, so that he knows not to flebotomize with a pungent flebotomy instrument, unless he is skilled with skillfulness.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is known that you should leave that one and move to another, or seek some other vein; or that you flebotomize at the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and you will section that with a skilled flebotomy instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform phlebotomy on the patient's thigh, then place a cupping device below the structure of the arm that touches the area inside so that you can collect the area of the pulses, and place a band above them with tension; and place a ligature on the arm and section the concave vein in the phlebotomy process as we have described; and be careful not to cause bruising during percussion at any point in the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you perform it, with strong ligatures, the swelling occurs at the point where you have placed the cupping device, then that swelling is a sign of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the phlebotomy as it does with the urine of a child, and the blood is subtle red, then you know that it is from the artery's blood; and then you stop and pause the tie above that point for a long space; and place the tie above, and if the blood is absorbed, because many veins are absorbed, then you tighten the arm and release it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And beware of the patient's mood, and be above their temper, and do not annoy them for several days until they are healthy.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not absorbed, and it seems that you do not have present medicine for this, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of the patient is constricted, and the blood is absorbed; or take a thread of floss, and finish with that, and take one vein and tighten above the point of the concave vein in the structure descending into the ligature and into the pulvis until another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is absorbed, it's good; and if not, then cure that wound with the remedy which is preceded by the remembering of the place where the powders are absorbed to stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the absorption of the patient's blood is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the wound and the possibility of the ligature of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Moreover, the dark vein in phlebotomy is a youthful thing that extracts the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; therefore, because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have described.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And beware the phlebotomist who is above-temperament in the phlebotomy of the patient, because below that is a nerve; and then if you adjust to the puncture of the phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will cause stupor to the patient, and it is difficult to heal them, and far from being completely healthy. And this nerve appears many times at the sentiment; and if it is hidden for several hours and is subtle and does not show, then beware that you pause the phlebotomy at the point where you are performing the section of the vein, and avoid the nerve with your forcelessness.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you open the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The youthfulness of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And beware in this property, if you want the phlebotomies to puncture with olive or myrtle phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all the veins, since it is neither an artery nor a nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Moreover, it is convenient for you to know that the phlebotomy should beware that the cupping device does not touch the top of the lacert as much as possible, and seek the easiest point, and do not touch them if they are not touched by the primary percussion above the phlebotomy, which is above several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, it is strongly necessary for them to be apostemated in several hours, when they are not phlebotomized on the primary percussion, and do not touch anything in that apostema.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of phlebotomy of that and the accidents of the patient are so many, in which you should beware to think about their rectification.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the conservation of health and for the hope of the patient's safety and caution against the occurrence of ailments, and that it be performed on one of the veins that are in the body, such as: cephalic, dark, and basilica; and that phlebotomy be performed at the beginning of spring, above all in the morning of spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when appearances of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at the first hour after three hours have passed since the sunrise of that day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Moreover, phlebotomy that is administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity to that, or of night or of day, at any hour and in any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And beware that a child should not be phlebotomized until they are 14 years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except for the fourth month until the seventh, and the old people should not be phlebotomized whose age has passed 60 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And since it is necessary to cleanse the veins in some manner, so that the mondified intestines are freed from obstruction in the fleubotomy, if there is a motive for retaining the superfluous humors, so that the veins do not attract the purulent humors in the fleubotomy of the intestines, which are principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not perform fleubotomy on patients who are nauseous and suffer from cramps, nor those who are affected by malautia or ebreta, until it is remedied that they are free from it, nor those with hydropic malaute, and more because fleubotomy is delayed by colic passion and vomit, and the pain in the belly, and the multiplication of coughs and troubles and exercises of fasting or vigilias and all causes that dissolve virtue, whether it be a bodily or animal corpus.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider the subtlety of humors within if the blood is thick, with wines and beverages, and with medicines if it is possible to make it more subtle at all costs.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or is excited by some exercise so that the blood may be subtled.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the fleubotomy of it in the chest during the day, so that it is around the hour of tierce, thus as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And perform it so that the chest of that one is guarded on that day from all evil accidents and animal anguishes, thus as there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all corporal accidents, thus as there is trouble and excessive pain and cough and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his seat, let the causes be present in the use of that which customarily costs with the aromatics and odors of the balms and similar things to them, according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the fleubotomy operator on a cushion that is placed above the cushion of that one who must be fleubotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the diseased arm, and rub that with his hand the fleubotomy operator does two or three times; and then strengthen the ligament in the corset and involve that for two days.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the structure be tempered, because the structure when it is not engorged, or the structure is overly full, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is mollified, and then it prohibits the body of the blood from being assuaged.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then the structure, because that one who must be fleubotomized rubs his hands together between them until the veins are inflated and declared to the sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the fleubotomy operator anoints the diseased fleubotomy with a little of anti-inflammatory oil properly; and then pauses the diseased finger of the left hand over that vein, below the place where he wants to perform the fleubotomy, so that the vein is a little puffed up, and the percussion is seated because one of the veins is the one that is obstructed, thus as if it were a cord fleeing from the fleubotomy, and of those it is full of windiness; and when he pauses the fleubotomy over that, it is contracted away from the fleubotomy, and it is discovered by the fleubotomy operator; and the fleubotomy does not overcome the vein, and if it overcomes, that one is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for this reason, the fleubotomy operator must be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the fleubotomy, more if the vein is opened in one way, then it is good; and if not, you iterate another way below that place a little, or above the festination, if the place is not apostemated.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is apostemated, or the malaute spreads, then you leave it for a day or for two, and do not strengthen the ligament, because you would strongly attract an apostemated caution, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then iterate the fleubotomy if it is loved.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it does not reach the quantity that you want, then you iterate the fleubotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust the perception a little, and make festination within so that the place is apostemated, because the place is apostemated in many homes for few perceptions.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	More if it has already been apostemated, then do not iterate over it, because you do not excuse any cause; and pause on that part of the wound with oil, because it alleviates the body of the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place with oil and that the other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer the wound with oil in all fleubotomy where it fleubotomizes the veins from the prohibition of bodily blood, and make a tyrical and sagzenous effort when it is paused on one of those over the place, because the blood is subtled and revolves when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the fleubotomy a great apostema is engendered, because many veins accumulate, and mainly to that one which has not been bloodied except for that vein, or in the perception of the little vein, and then you touch, and pause on the place, soaking in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it happens that it makes one approach the sentiment of the blood from that vein in order to complement it with another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you find a spot on the area for several days with some blackness or greenishness, do not touch it; and if you want to, pause over that cause of alopecia or mirroring dissolving, or some cause of sugary mentation or calming semblance of it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many gathered accusations and emissions of evacuations from the flea-botany of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then pause your hand over that, and if then you find softness from your compression on that, then that emission is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you pause over that cause of what we have said, because the flow of the arterial blood is strong.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an implant in that which is stipulated, so that the area becomes hardened, and then cure that with another cure within, so that it may be healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it happens that you extract from the blood all human secrets according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the colour that appears over the blood, as it seems.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow in so that it may be red; and similarly if you find it thick, then you let it flow in so that it may be subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, so that the sharpness of it may be stopped.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it happens to that one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a vein, that the flea-botany of the vein may be amplified and the flea-botanists are wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that one who is weak, the opposite of that should be done, and it happens that he extracts it in many ways, and that his tract should be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best administration in flea-botany of a vein is that it should be cross-sectional, not punctured.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of flea-botany is safe from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than flea-botany according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And at the one that is accustomed to overcoming syncope from flea-botany, and it happens that you cure it in the meantime with flea-botany and a small infusion of milk or simple oxymel scalfatum; and extract the blood in three ways or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is complicated by completeness, then take beforehand the flea-botany to infuse in essence of mirrhetic or essence of aromatic melissa, with species also as pepper, cane, ginger and similar, or in aromatic essence and much odorous.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if it occurs syncope from flea-botany, and it is the cause of much blood issuance, then it happens that you take in drinking water of flesh and essence very odorous and subtle; and use aromaticity with algae, and be limited to the seven feet in that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to evacuate the seven veins and dissolve the seven bloods in a second way, it happens that the flea-botany is for much evacuation, and its virtue is weak, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But who wants to evacuate the seven veins, and throw out the seven bloods in a second vein, and the seven body is strong, then make that approach for seven hours or nine of the first flea-botany.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to attract the blood of the seven body to the contrary of the part where it declines, it happens that it is evacuated on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which much blood is scalped and is sharp and makes fever occur, it happens that it is thrown out of the blood at once and is of great quantity and is amplified the perception within so that it may syncope; then pause your hand over the pulse of the one who has the body of the blood, so that no death occurs in place of syncope, because many times it ends there when the flea-botanist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it does not happen when you want to dislocate the vein and evacuate the blood in a second way, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult to issue the blood, that you press below with vehemence and encumbered extension, because that is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having let it flow in so that it may be flea-botanized secondly; or remain with the sharpness of the flea-botanist who coagulates the blood at the orifice of the vein; or pause over that of Tyriacal Alfarach, or of Sagizenia, and compress it lightly in so that the blood may flow out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is apostematized, then let it flow and do not touch it until the apostema is settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if you need to provoke evacuation of the blood in a second way, and there is no excuse, then you will bleed that over that place or on another arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "arm veins" is blocked in the area of the forearm or basilic vein, when they are not swollen or varicose, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the blocking of it is that the patient inserts their hand in hot water so that the vein appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then stretch it out over that same ligament with a narrow structure; and then block according to the small transverse, not latitudinally nor according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it is a broad perception and it is your blocking, which you block there over the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you put your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you perceive your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you were in the summer days, then you are exempt from the iteration of putting your hand in hot water, and it is customary to pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the blocking of this vein is more saving than all the other veins, because there it has no pulsating vein, nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the blocking of the little vein of the right hand is convenient for the diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the blocking of it is that you stretch out your hand in the ligament or with your hand, because you have put it in hot water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the view; and then block it transversely; and if you inject there all the same, you will not feel anything in return.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to ultimately block your hand with the blocking, because there it is the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then put your hand in hot water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not iterate this in hot water, the blood will congeal in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as you extract the blood according to the quantity of need, then you pause over the vein with oil or salt, so that it is not consolidated too tightly; and similarly, it is customary that you do this in all straight lines.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the benefit of the blocking of that vein of the left hand is that it is convenient for the diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the blocking of it as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the Sephena vein in blocking is for the diseases that are in the lower part of the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and retention of menses, and for the diseases of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and legs ancient, and their semblance of diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the blocking of it is that the patient inserts their foot in hot water and makes friction over that spot until the veins appear; and he puts it on the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein has an apparent digit, and from there it ramifies into the face of the foot with many branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then block more widely around the leg from the digit to the aggregation of it, because it is better and more healthy.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you block it on the face of the foot, then you guard against the nerves that are below there on the face of the foot, and pause your blocking where you blocked for the crossing, lest you want to inject.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And it is a visible blocking.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you put his foot in hot water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the blocker makes a mistake in the first blocked place, then make a new blocking in another spot, because the place is healthy; and do not fear his malice, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same with the Sephena vein of the other foot in equal manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said, from the digit below the hollow of the wild or wooded part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of the blocking of it is to alleviate pain when it is caused by bad blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the blocking of it is that the patient enters into a bath, and tightens and strengthens their skin from the waist to the ankle below the four fingers in a long subtle band, because it does not appear except for that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, then you block it according to each engine that is possible for you and according to the transverse, and it is better; or inject there for injection or section there for sectioning, because the place of it is healthy.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many homes very ambiguous; and if you atrophy there, and it does not appear to the sentiment of all, then block some root of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot in the auricular and anular digits.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And observe the nerves, and make the blood flow in quantity as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And release the constriction and pause at the site of the phlebotomy wound, and tighten the site, so that the bleeding is healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From evacuation and from the qualities of using those remedies.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Evacuations are made with clysters, or with scammony, or with enemas.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And evacuation is done according to two methods: one of them is scarification and blood extraction, and the other is evacuation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this evacuation without scarification is done according to two methods, because either it is with a hot iron or without a hot iron.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the evacuations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 14 places of the body, among which one is where pauses are made on the ankle; and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of the neck in two parts of the collarbone; and evacuations below the jawbone just below the mouth; and evacuations of two spatulas; and evacuations of the alohoster, and it is above the end of the hip; and evacuations of two focal points, and they are of two arms; and evacuations of two cavities; and evacuations of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And evacuation does not extract blood except from the small, sparse veins in the flesh, and therefore it does not receive virtue through them, just as it is received through phlebotomy; nor is it believed that evacuation should be done with a hot iron or without a hot iron in any illness done for replenishment until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Moreover, if it is necessary to provoke an evacuation for illness or for a continuous flow, administer it at every hour from the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is because the blood in them is multiplied within them until it induces a desire for evacuation through evacuation and creates gravity and heaviness in their head; and from them it creates replenishment and vigor in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and from them it creates prurience in their face and in their forehead, and darkness and weakness in their eyes; and from them it causes the place of their evacuation to gush; and from them it multiplies their humor; and from them it creates a taste of blood in their mouth, or the tongue is infected and spits out blood; and from them it multiplies their sleep, and from them they vomit blood in their sleep, with rigor and anguish and plague and other similar symptoms.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And thus when it happens in any of these causes, and especially if it is on the third or middle day of the month, then we command that evacuation should be done after two or three hours have passed from the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of evacuation from the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and descends to the eyes; moreover, it is believed that this should be an evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this evacuation is at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not lawful to use that evacuation on him who has a complete fracture, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it is not believed that the use of those evacuations should be on the old people, and in the heads of which there are frequent illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Moreover, to the one who continues to do that on him is done forgetfulness; and therefore it is believed that you command the evacuator to pause his hand a little at the site below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Moreover, evacuation of the ankle is at the site of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilica: and therefore it confers an asthma, and constriction of the ale, and scission of the instrument of the ale, and to all, and replenishment.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is believed that the evacuation of the ankle should be impeded a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debilitation in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the evacuation of the hagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and opthalmia, and emigranea, and prefocacio, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilisque.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is believed that you command the evacuator not to press his hand on scarification because it may not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And evacuation below the chin confers a bitter taste in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and a resemblance to those illnesses that are in the mouth, and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the alihelic vein that is in both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Moreover, the evacuation that is done on the two spatulas confers a captivation, which is done for replenishment of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the evacuation of the two divisions of the inner parts of the focal points confers benefit from the phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, dark, and cephalic, because it attracts the blood from all those veins, as well as those small veins of the other gross veins, until it pervades the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the surgeon to not cut too deeply in the incision, because the area is deprived of flesh, and afterwards you will find the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It is a wound that is treated by operating on the hips and confirming the wounds of the buttock and the ulcerous pus that comes afterwards.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And beware that you command the surgeon to make a large wound, and it should be of iron, because the area needs strong suction; and strongly sew up the subtle wounds with subtlety in the incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More wounds on the smaller limbs manifest for minor injury, because they attract the blood from the whole body, and confirm the ancient pains of the joints and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provoke the menses, and confirm the bother and admiration; and stay in place of a flebotomy of two soporifics, and alohorn, and of two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, I do not want to weaken the whole body and make it fall into syncopes in many homes.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the wounds alohorn is the youthfulness that proceeds to the youthfulness at the wounds of two limbs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the wounds is that it stops the wound at the beginning of the void and sucks for timely suction, and does not prolong the position of the wounds, but rather pauses those lightly, and remains quiet, and that the humors come to the area for a favorable event.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease iterating this and continue until you see the area already red and swollen and that the rigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who is of tender flesh and rare pores, beware that you scarify him gently and not too much, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the surgeon to amplify the scarification and make a little deeper, and temper the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thickened, then beware that you scarify two gentle ways, because in the first way it opens the path of subtlety to the blood and its circulation.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More in the second, to the precise inspection of the extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very filthy, then make a third scarification for cleansing, so that it reaches the bottom.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we make many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that you scarify deeply by scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the hollow tube only so much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that one whose tube is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are so constricted, beware that the places of the wounds should be anointed with lenitive, resolving oils; if it is in summer, thus as oil of aloes or oil of violet, or oil of gentle massages, or oil of camomile; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of blood, and to those that seem similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, cold, then the oil should be of marjoram, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloes, or oil of anise, and to their similars.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	More if the surgeon is of large pores with tender flesh, then beware that it is prohibited from oil, and beware that to those places of wounds their own proper ventilation should be washed with warm water or cold water of solatrum, or water of camomile, or water of bordolaguas, and similars to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose blood is of much humidity, wash his wounds with warm vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similars to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And that one whose superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with warm anticy, or water of sansuc, which is majorana, or decoction of anise, or chamomile, and to their similars.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And beware that the wound should be kept away from bathing; however beware that it should be administered properly in front of the bath for an hour or two, and beware that it sleeps properly with the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that one should regulate the wounded person from phlebotomy before wounds.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Beware that you consider from the beginning: then if the surgeon or he who should flebotomize is choleric and wounds above the blood agitated and inflamed, then beware that you take causes of infrigidation, thus as milgranas acetosas, and endivia in warm agreement and laytuguas, and secanabin, and julep, and to their similars.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their wanderings thus as poultices, and flesh of ausel's serbiges, and wanderings condensed with agrimony, and to their similars.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the patient's complexion is cold, it is likely that they took in bad air or ate foods that are heavy and difficult to digest, such as sumac, and there was a great smell of putrid matter between the veins and the Christmas season; and it is commanded that they use little of the purging medicine and of mangier, and pause the wandering of their loins and kidneys and small intestines.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is likely that on the day of ventosity and flebotomy, the drink should be stronger than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is likely that it should be given in drink at certain hours to certain men tyriac alpharac, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or alcilite during ventosity or flebotomy or thereafter, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtly purified; and it is not likely that they take that scalping.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Maybe the ventoses that are their scarification are ventoses that are paused on the feet, and on the worse part of gout, and on the navel, in the hollows of the joints, and the pustules of the ankle, because these members do not suffer from scarification above them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but attraction of blood from member, thus as one pauses a ventose on the mamilha in bad flux of blood of the blood of the veins; and they use that so that the ventosity is dissolved, cold and viscous of the member, thus as one pauses on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and clears it and removes the pain since it resolves ventosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And already it is paused on the roots when they accumulate in their opilation or pus, because through virtue of strong attraction the humble opilation and eradicates the pus from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it happens when it is paused on the feet and worst part of gout, then ventosity is enclosed in those.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventoses are administered with sweet juice only; and some vegetables are administered at the fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some vegetables are administered full of warm water treatment in the bad humors of gout.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the ventosa should be full and should be bigger, so it is warm water alone or water in which suitable herbs are cooked for that convenience.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of ventosa administered at the fire: let the amplitude of the orrifici be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon should be the width of a palm; and let it be in the fat of it, in the place that is in the circle, the width of it, the hole should be small according to the quantity that enters into it through a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of iron rod or citrus, with thick margins, lion, hinges and ties so that the member does not leave its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be in the middle of the iron or copper crossbeam, where a candle is paused at the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already this ventosa is greater than the one we have recommended; and the lesser pause of that according to the bad humors and the state of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventoses of the old men are weakened, so others than the ventoses of the young and of thick corpulent bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this ventosa at the fire over the member is that it extends the meca at the fire decently within a pause of a candle of wax, and pauses it on the middle of the crossbeam in the middle place of the ventosa, so that the fire is kindled around the partition below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is paused on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the hole that we have said, until when we hold the ventoses and do not indicate that they open the finger and that the vapor escapes over that hole, then the ventosa will be almost dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And they ignite the meca according to its manner, and then they indicate that they are freed from that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Maybe in ventosa that is administered in the bad humor of flatulence, with water, in which there is no crossbeam nor hole, and it is not administered unless it is full of water, and it is paused on the member only warmly.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this ventosa, the more it is big, the better it is, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 148.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood-lettings are not administered on many members unless on the members in which it is not possible to position ventoses, due to their smallness, thus as the foot and gum and similar to them; or on a member denuded of flesh, thus as the finger and nose and those similar.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that have been found to be blood-lettings that are in the waters of muddy worldly affairs.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they are laid down during the day and night in muddy water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and ventoses; and then the member of the patient is cooled until it becomes red-hot; and then they are paused on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck from the place where the wind comes out, it is better for juvenation.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, then wash the place with warm water and add a lot of water; and it should be frequently washed and squeezed out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body is prolonged by the flow of blood vessels, and it is resolved, then you soak a cloth in cold water, and pause that on top until the resolution is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then powder with triturated vitriol, or gall and similar things to their stippling causes, until the blood is dried; or place on the area the crushed heads of roasted faba beans, and they will dry until the faba beans adhere to the area, and the blood is dried.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And be careful, if it is necessary, iteration of blood vessels, when it is possible to move them around.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the blood vessels are prohibited from suspension, then frequently wash the place with recent blood or stick a needle in the areas until it gets blood; and then pause, for they will feel some blood as soon as they are touched.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to calm them down, powder with a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or cinnamon, and it will soon be so.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is many very necessary things in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and vulgar people, who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this manner of the sciences in our land is private; and I have not forgotten anything from everything at all times; and I have not abandoned what came after, but only through long study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I added experience and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my experience; because I have abbreviated it for you others and freed it from the occupation of prolixity; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed it in many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which the necessary premises are, before we begin the remembrance of broken members and diverse things, each one by one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	I will therefore set out in the prohemium of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those whose beginning is forced by the craftsmen and stationed on the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt that they may know or learn this noble art better than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And then I say that when accidents occur, such as fracture or dislocation or twisting or breaking, then it is fitting that you begin with flebotomy or alleviating that, or at least sometimes, if no cause prohibits, thus as debilitation of virtue, or it is the one to which accidents happen frequently, or in decrepitude, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then I am content with a diet of fresh herbs and of lean meats and of game birds; and I prohibit gross meats and filling up on diets and all diets that fill the veins with blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first regimen, in which they were accustomed to customary corridor.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And then since the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is fitting that the patient should be nourished with nutritious diets of much and gross food in which there is viscosity, thus as their diets made from wheat flour cooked in water, and rice, and caps, and feet, and stomachs of cows, and ewes, and fresh peas, and gross and similar things to them, and at this regimen it is done a coagulation of fracture by means of ligament and marrow.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that the broken bones, when they are in the old people who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they can be continued and consolidated according to their nature through the desiccation of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time through the desiccation of those members, and they continue and consolidate those that are of theirs until the end of old age, thus as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	More, imperial nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of all parties any similar cause to glue in which it is gross that adheres and strengthens until they are sometimes conglutinated and sometimes released, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, thus as a focus at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its own works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	Because of this cause it is necessary to pause the veins of the patient, veins in which gravity and viscosity and thickness have accumulated, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many varieties of fracture according to the variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And we know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the variety of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other limbs are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will come to a remembrance of each species of fracture, explained in its own distinct chapter separate from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many varieties of fracture in the same bone.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their meteyssas; because there is made an arcuated fracture other than that which occurs in the stars; and some veiled ones are made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagittal and stellar and proceeding and not-proceeding, as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to be written, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a fracture with small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to each species there is generated or tormented proper in restoration of it according to what will come to remembrance of it distinctly in its own places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many signs of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And because of this it is known as a fracture of the bone: it is a twisting of it, and of that prominence and appearance of it to the sentiment, and so of it when it comprehends with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And then when it is not in the place of apparent twisting or it does not feel deviated from its usual touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a twisting or small fissure, therefore do not cover that you manipulate it with your hand and compress everything; pause over it from the medicines of which I have remembrance at that moment which convenes to the place; and then it will be straight for subtle structure.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And we know that the place where it is arcuated and not divided into two or other than that which does not occur in the sagittal, as it is remembered by all part of its comparison, then it covers that you begin from your hour to rectification of it before it occurs an apostemic cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it occurs an apostemic cautery, then it will leave that for some days within which the aposteme ceases; and then it will be wrapped according to whichever manner you can of elevation and of generation.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And we know that restoration of it and reduction of it is less burdensome than that of the bone in which they occur sagittally.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then it will strengthen according to what will come to remembrance of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there are sagittals, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And it is your position in which you pause the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member, then you will perform that you make them return to their positions and according to whichever manner you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware according to your force that you do not operate on the patient for your operation of their limb or lesion; and perform according to your own power that you apply one bone to another as a companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it covers that at that hour you will profitably touch with your hand then, and if sometimes here is some diverse cause, rectify it and wrap it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, as if many foolish doctors make veiled ones that make them occur apostemic cautery for their operation, or make them occur in contraction of the member, as we have seen this for the operation of their veiled ones.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then you will connect, then you will equate and decently operate and structure of that member, and rest and tranquility; you will admonish the patient about this and make them avoid that in the hour of their vigils and of their sleep, and they will see their revolution and agitation, and they will have their ejection, and they will have all their movements in total virtue; and beware that the position of the member is a position in which pain is assured, which cause is because when one feels in the disposition of the position of the member or lesion; then it covers that you will permute that to another disposition of that in which there is no pain; and look at that which the position of it is direct and wrapped, so that the member does not twist when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; because we know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small such as the arm and the finger and the foce and similarly to those, then it covers that the envelopment should be of very subtle wrapping.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Those who have thick ankles like a cushion or the chest, cover that in which there is a hard and lasting wrapping, because the binding connects the large member and strengthens all parts equally, so that in it there is no spot.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, make your evacuation of equity, place a suitable bandage on that, over the area of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to whether the member is more meek; and strengthen your hand a little on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then see if you can apply it to the affected part above the area of the fracture, and strengthen more than you don't force your structure on which you have strengthened the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend your wrapping around the area of the fracture a little, and soften the structure little by little, until you take hold of the area in a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other way over the area of the wrapping, and then see if the wrappings are on the affected part below the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the wrapping and in softening according to what we have said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the layers of wrapping to stop the Leon's bandage or cloth on which the twisting of the fracture is engaged, if there is twisting; and otherwise, do not pause in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause over the other bandage, and engage on these wrappings decently and fairly, if in the area there is no inflammation or aposteme to be cautious, and then pause over the one that settles the aposteme and removes the inflammation; and let it be for some days; and then strengthen over the same wrappings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the wrappings be of the marrow of a good cane, and be formed skillfully; or let them be of fir wood; or of palm branches; and let each wrapping be ample according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is necessary that the wrapping which is placed over that fracture be thicker and a little longer than the other wrappings, and the length of the stick according to what is proportionate to the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the wrappings with another bandage according to your first structure; and then tie it below decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the area of the fracture itself, and when more is removed from the fracture, the structure is mended.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and subtlety, and be of soft wool; and if the threads are thick, like when you have seen through the operation of some foolish people who pause the threads of twisted cords on the tort, and it is a great error, when you cut the structure without equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And also thin threads are not very convenient, because you do not conserve the structure for those who want it, and it is necessary that between wrapping and wrapping there be more of a digit.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the extremities of the wrappings to the structure in those places, then pause below those of the Leon's bandage or the Carmen's wrapping until it does not cause harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some wrapping fractures are a plague, and they cause disruption in the cord, and you will find a reminder in that chapter according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that all torn members are not straightened with wrappings on the first day; which causes it because the member, when it is large, does not allow pauses over the wrappings unless for five or seven days or months, according to your careful consideration of the advent of aposteme caution.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the implanters among whom the Ancients restored, who were placed over fractures and dislocations and torsions.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of implantation as an abbreviation of restoration of fracture, convenient for complex and major fractures in women and children, because it is about that on which there is no heat nor cold: and it is that you take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And it is comfortable like that, but you should filter it through the album of Huou, and pause the compression of it not being spacious or subtle; and then use it for that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manipulation for implanting fractures and dislocations: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is made from millet salvage, all one denarius; of myrrh and aloes one denarius; of alochil one denarius twenty; all these are triturated and mixed with water or album of Huou, if the complexity of the patient's wound is scaled; and then use this implantation, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones very well, and confers many homes.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manipulation for implanting which confers a fracture and dislocation: recipe of migrach and a half denarius of white alta, one denarius; of myrrh and aloes one denarius five; of acacia one denarius six; of Armenian bol one denarius twenty.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are ground in a mortar with crushed Motay constricting stone, and are sieved, and are mixed with water or with white of egg and shall be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manual of plastering for joints and separated bones in their places, and then accidental pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take a soft cloth and submerge it in warm oil and wax, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Moreover, in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, but rather a cauterizing postume that expels pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another manual of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves of a dry kind and papaver savings; mix all together and make an plaster of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manual of plaster abbreviated administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining postume: recipe made with wax, chamomile and violet flowers, of barley flour, of all in a part. all are ground and mixed with wine, if the member is not scaled.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	Moreover, if it is scaled, then make a compress with water of sweet marjoram or with water and use it there.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another manual of plastering very strong in resolution that this first, when it happens that a postume is hard to restore the member: recipe made with wax and sesame oil, and balaustia, and mellilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, all in a part; all are ground and mixed with water of sage or water of dew or wine, all as suitable according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Moreover, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free text that it should be placed over the trembling member for its restoration, unless a certain type of wax and oil is made, and no other cause; and he recommends that it should be moderate between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Moreover, Galen has seen that they are placed over the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is exsiccation with little heat, thus also with myrrh, and similarly to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Manual of plaster that competes with lesion and pain: recipe made with migat, of cezès, of shaved homespun or pennyroyal, and of wax, and salt, all mixed together; all are ground and sieved, and all are mixed, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Moreover, the quantity according to which one covers the lesion and approaches being dislocated, is that you consider if no pain or swelling nor the bone is broken nor is moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if a vehement pain or swelling or inflammation occurs at the place, then you touch or remove it at that hour, and lift off the plaster from there.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth of linen and marine sponge humidified, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the place until the swelling and pain are calmed; and then lay it to rest for an hour; and then place on it a soft cloth submerged in warm oil or rosated oil, and leave it on for a night until it is secure from cauterizing postume, and that the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain of it is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle structure and small plaster, and do not strengthen it too much for your primary constriction, and subtly add to that until it is healthy.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the postume and roughness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are completely alleviated, and you have become skilled in plaster and structure, then you will apply that also as you have done from the beginning of the treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if it does not occur to the member any of those causes that we have said, then do not delay but apply it for three days or four or five. and some treatments all together are left on for 20 days according to what appears per the dislocation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure altogether, and settle in the thickening of the wine of the patient, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Moreover, if you sometimes find the place of the fracture is dried and extended more than it should not cover, then you know that the nutrient is prohibited from reaching there; and therefore embrocate it with warm water altogether, which delays all treatment; and it is in all three days; and loosen the structure a little, and for this operation correct the member to receive the nutrient, and it is healthily restored.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	It's more likely that the fractured limb is not restored to its original state when it's not properly set, according to their conviction, and it's restored with twisting, which is an error according to the operation, and there's great fear, and if it were a director who would increase the ancient writings and would obtain authority over those books.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen anything like it before, because it's more reasonable that it doesn't happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: The fracture that occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures occur due to percussion of the spine, and the percussion goes through the entire bone into the ciphac, which is below the bone, just as it does in the fist, and for this type the species is called ascial; or the spine is divided into some part of the bone, and divides the flesh of it and doesn't pass into the back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attrition; and the cause of it is percussion on the ground or fall onto stone, and its symptoms are similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that almost reaches the periosteum which is below the bone; or it's in the surface of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the fracture is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like [fiber], and for this reason it's called this type of fracture capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it's a fracture that is made or by fall or by percussion of the stone and its symptoms, which makes some layer of the bone enter the divided parts, and it occurs in the concave place just as it happens to the roles of the brain when they occur due to their percussion and are divided into the entered parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it's made in the bodies of humid bones, just as they have fragile heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures are injuries, so they are weights just as they are separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find a remedy for all this in its proper place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I will discuss all these types of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry into their tents and signs of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is recognized by this that it's discovered on the bone, and it's cleaned, and limited around its tents, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Moreover, in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see per the accidents that signify for manifest significance over fear, just as it's vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of will, and syncope, and acute fever, and dislocation of the veins and rigor of those, and symptoms similar to theirs in the major dispositions, if not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-coherent accidents, then you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that since it has come to you the plague at the beginning as it's a plague and this is in the days of winter, then it's believed that you should study in the osteument of the bone within the 14th day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it's in the days of summer, then it's believed that you should touch or starve the bone within the 7th day, having that which is below the bone be corrupted by the periosteum, and that the accidents we have recounted happen.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the periosteum covering the brain, and it's in divided parts and attrition, then it's believed that you should cut the divided part with comminuted and attrited, according to what you have recounted to yourself.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it's that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner possible for you according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to make the detection of the bone, whether of blood or aposteme cauterized, then you oppose yourself to what is believed, and it's that you fill the place with draps infused in wine and rose oil, and make repose the plague until it's sedated by the aposteme, and be secure from fluxes of blood; and begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that is according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one manner is that you cut the bone with an incision of straight style, and this is its form: And then administer another incision like this, a little wider than that; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more incisions wider than that, according to the need.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it's believed that you should give a different name to diverse incisions, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the affected extremities, and are of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use of their arm is facilitated by percussion on the incisors so that it does not constrict the head and neck.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to perforate in the dental circuit of the teeth while you administer the incisors with trolleys, which are called non-deep trolleys.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And it is not called thus because those do not touch the term of the bone of the tooth to what is near them, so that the trolley is rounded at the extremity or margin over what appears to be a small circle or margin, which prohibits being submerged and passes the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these trolleys which almost converge at the specificity of each bone, until they are present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of specificity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of trolleys: The quality of perforating in the dental circuit of the broken bone is that it pauses the trolley over the bone and revolves around it with the fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then permit the trolley to pass to another location, and pause what is between all the tracks of the quantity of the thickness of the root or environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you insert the incisors into the incisors that are between each track of the bone, and make that very subtle push on what is at the end of levitation, thus as we have said, until you radiate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause to stir up the instruments which will be applied to it, thus with delicate forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you keep total caution so that the incisor does not touch any part of the cervical region.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus you will have circumvented the perforated bone, and it will be separated from the cervical region if it is continued in it, and you will have extracted that, it is necessary to reason and equalize it in the roughness of what is on the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but more precise, because it was made thicker and more subtle than the other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you find some small bone fragments and splinters, then take them out in a way that is facilitated by what is your instrument; and then cure the wound with liniments and unguents which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is ligature, far from pain, which Galen and others have written about for great healing; and this is the sermon of it: necessary is it to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most vehement and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and placed beneath it the extremity of this gentle and light incisor, which is the form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular part is smooth and does not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two layers beforehand in length, thus as often; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the cervical region on the face of the incident acute bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you percussion over the incisors of a part with a small hammer until you have inserted all the bone in a facilitated way, thus as it is revolved, and you will be secure from the panniculus that does not happen in any manner, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their own; certainly, and if he was dormant.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if you find some annexed cause to the bone of the panniculus in certain locations of the bone, you will insert that part with the extremity of the incisor, that lenticular one, and you will deliver it facilitated, because it is delivered from its nuisance and its pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is absent or removed from the bone is its face, and you find it in the roughness and subtle splinters, then it is necessary to reason that roughness and radiate those subtle splinters with subtle instruments for which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible to administer them at every location most convenient for their administration and most direct according to what you perceive in your operation on the broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is necessary that you administer in your reason with which you radiate the bone at the beginning of the most latent of those instruments, and then use it for the most subtle part of it, and do not cease from what follows according to continuity until you reach administering the most precise and subtle part of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Moreover, in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary that you administer cure according to what you perceive for rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that has not been diminished concerning all those who have studied in this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And you will see about what we have written and shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus is restrained when you radiate the bone, then it is necessary that you take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the primary drap, making it very smooth so that it does not irritate the cervical region; and then administer over that liament late, and do not strengthen it except for the quantity that has the wound as solace.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And that treatment should be given for one or two days among which it is certain to avoid excessive caution; and then dismiss that and administer medicines as needed, avoiding excessive dryness, also with linseed oil and farina of barley, and powder of essences and aristology, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is that you make from these powdered medicines to be sprinkled over the plague, also with dry things; and universally, administer in this entire medicine of proprietary nature which is that it should cleanse and not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware that your virtue in the treatment of the plague is clean; and it should not be in the surdity of deceit nor another; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted over the panicle of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and adds malicious malice to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it settles in the ciphal of the head, as if it is mondified by the bone and majorly when the treatment is misrepresented, and it is blackened on its surface; and therefore consider then that it settles on the patient with accidents that we have said, knowing that it is a pernicious total doctrine.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not settle blackness but from the medicine that is paused above, and it is in virtue of that medicine which makes that blackness, then it is necessary that you take a mild dose and rub olive oil on the affected parts. and apply those liniments as a bandage, and then pause that over the ciphal; and then treat it with the species of treatment that converge within so that it may be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is bruised.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that it is not bruised on the nose but two parties similarly placed above, or one of those hollow veins, because in it there are two bones, because the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not bruised and does not settle on it except with atrition and tortuosity and sinewiness.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parties of it is bruised, then it is necessary that you introduce the small finger into the nasal sieve, and that you adjust that fracture with your index finger, and with the small finger beforehand, so that the nose returns to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do it in a way that is facilitated for you, and beware that you do not fall into that pitfall of operating on the patient's malady.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper party of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then it is necessary that it be equalized with the extremity of the file on which it is slightly thickened.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parties, then you make a similar thing to that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then place the seventh or eighth day of rest for the post-treatment caution.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of linen, if the fracture is in one party, or mix two calves, if the fracture is in two parties, and let it be in the thickened calve of as much quantity that fills the tract of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And thus some of the ancient restorers said that the calves should be infused in borax, and should be permeated all day, but it has not been seen by me; however, I have found that the piece should be infused in a mixture of egg white as comfort with powder of moly; and then let the calve enter so that the bone is firm and the cartilage is indurated.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some hollow veins are inserted into the nose, in place of a calve, pain of anguish because it is enveloped by a cloth of linen lion; and it is that already you have the fracture of the nose very violently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do calves.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if it settles into another hollow post-treatment caution, apply the nose with cerate or cotton stuffed in vinegar and olive oil, or in diaquilion.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if it does not settle into post-treatment caution, then it is necessary that you apply beforehand farina of sizami and powder of essences cooked in egg white; and then pause on the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are bruised with a small fracture or comminution, then it is necessary that you separate them, and extract them with instruments that converge on them; and then close the separation, and treat it with what encarnates and consolidates, and applies to what is convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if it settles into a plague within the nose, then it is necessary that you treat it with calves and administer pipes of lead so that it may be completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is bruised.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not plagued, beware then that the fracture is beforehand so solitary, and it is not bruised in two and is curved to the parties within, then its cognition is lighter.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you introduce your index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then introduce the index finger of your right hand; and impress upon them the glibosity of the fracture in order to facilitate the parts that were dislocated before, at the level of the upper bone; and thus you will equilibrate the disjointed parts.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible is separated into two, then you must administer extension to both parts according to a straight direction until it is possible to equalize them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if it happens with a concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those that you hope will remain in a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and place a pause on the fractured mandible, and place a pause on the duplicated cloth, and a pause on the great stellar splint, or a small peg at the length of the mandible; and thus you will bind it according to how you have prepared the ligature and so that it is convenient for application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and tranquilize, and pause the food of their voracious appetite.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in some manner, then you will count and dissolve it on the third day; and place a correction of what has been altered from it and apply a poultice of soft millet, or album of egg white, or farina of chickpea, since you have stopped the corrosion of it, and pause on the applied lanolin.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then add and adjust that poultice on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, thus, do not remove it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; for many times this fracture is stabilized in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another occasion an abscess occurs cautiously, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and remove that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is in a plague, then consider whether it is a separated piece of bone or splinters, then you will subtly remove those splinters with what is convenient for the removal of those instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the plague is narrow, then you will amplify it with a fleobotomy according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those splinters, and none will remain, then you close the opening of the plague if it is wide; and otherwise, place one of the poultices that are convenient for it and incorporate it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the furcula of the joint in front of the foot is broken, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch splinters; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that they touch splinters, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is in a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is in a plague, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has the assistant and holds the broken furcula, and the other extends the vein to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then bind the fracture with tight bandages until it is formed according to how it converges, and it is not in a slight prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is convenient to place a small cloth or wool under the patient's bed, and its size will be according to the quantity of your necessity; and stretch and elevate the furcula and shorten the splint with your hand until it binds the fracture according to how it converges.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot stretch the extremity of the furcula to the previous parts, because it is perverted to the prong, then it is convenient that the patient be resupinated on their back, and place a large cushion under the muscle of one side, in greatness.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of it to the parts below until the bone of the furcula is elevated as it is in the prong, and then you correct the fracture and bind it with tight bandages.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Many times you feel splinters of the furcula and they are removed, then it is convenient to place a poultice on that and extract those splinters to facilitate.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you ingeniously make an incision of it with one of the instruments that you have prepared for it, since you had placed under the furcula the instrument that serves the ciphac; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a curve of which this is the concavity; and its width will be according to what you have needed from it, according to the greatness of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The greater the length of the patient is, the more possible it is for you to perform the operation; so that you have two extremities alike, one extended and the other stretched.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have inflicted when you have extracted the sagittal section of the bone is large, and you are sure of a post-operative abscess, then adjust the two lips of the wound under suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear a post-operative abscess, then fill the wound with drainage and poultices according to the quantity of the section of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms, then pour in warm oil and rose water, and apply a poultice over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the structure of the bone is broken and its section is exposed, it is necessary to apply a plaster made of flour of millet in album of water, and place it over the affected area, and apply a poultice beneath the title of the fracture, if it is indicated for that, and apply humectant; so that the torque which you hold with your Sarrazis hand should not be too long, and its width should be about one palm or around that; and apply double-layered poultices over the affected area and the plaster; and take a thin sheet of table board whose width is three fingers and similarly in length; and wrap it in a cloth, and wrap that cloth on the sheet at the location above the fracture site; and apply humectant as well as revolve that over the neck of the fracture and beneath the title of the fracture and beneath the title of the patient's thigh, and reduce it to the entire affected area, and whenever the structure of the fracture is descending, and it is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And thus, that the sheet should not be moved away from the broken bone; and for this reason, you will see the patient every day, so that when the ligament is mollified or the sheet is already removed, then you correct it and strengthen the bonding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's sleep on their neck, and place beneath the title of theirs, so that in the night, a small servant will support theirs; for thus, the assistant of theirs from the side of that will be elevated, and therefore the fracture of the furcula will be elevated by the muscle lift; or the arm of theirs will be tied to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless it forms in the location of the pus or abscess, until twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of theirs up to that point, and adjust it in the structure and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some vegetables are cooked in some homes, which is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The scapula bone is broken in the lateral location and does not break unless at the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so when the location of theirs is broken — and it is broken in the middle location of theirs — and it is not recognized unless by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture you will prepare theirs and reduce it according to its natural shape in every manner possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then apply over the location a powder of millet flour in album of water and stop it with a lion's paw; and apply a double-layered poultice of cloth; and apply over the thin sheet of table board according to the quantity of the entire scapula or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the sheet is concave in some of the locations of the scapula, then you will bend that concavity with a lion's paw, and apply the sheet according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it from below with a long humectant, and bind the sheet firmly until it is not moved away from its proper location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and all vegetables that are mollified, another vegetable is strengthened, and equalize the sheet if it is moved away from its proper location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their side in a straight position.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the scapula is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And so when this number is completed, then you will dissolve the ligament, and you should be assured that for those bones which at the beginning were not tempered nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the location of the bone's step and place beneath the codena, then you will divide over it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the furcula with caution against abscesses if they form here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a foot fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, some vegetables are broken in the middle location of theirs and that ends there; if the extremities of theirs are very bent and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	From the accidents of the patient when their waist is broken, it is declared that there is a decline in the internal parts and an acceleration to great pain, and difficulty in the breathing, and coughing, and strong vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sentiment.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back, with a cushion between their shoulder blades; and then press also on the muscles of them, and adjust the ribs to the two rib-cages, and subtly proceed in the operation and in the equation according to all manner possible and convenient, until they return to the shape of the bone as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place on the plaster and stopper and place underneath it a subtle layer of sawdust or of lime and of its similar levitation, so that you envelop it in a wrap; and then subtly proceed to bind it around the broken bone so that it is not dislocated; and go with the binding according to the return of the back to certain veins, and strengthen it with strict structure; and then consider the binding at all times, and when it is mollified, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to provoke the dissolution of that which corrodes or inflames, or pain, or abscess that accelerates in the area, then you cut and separate it and eradicate the plaster and rectify what accelerates through it by manner of cure of the patient; and then return the plaster, if sometimes it is done on the face; and adjust to their structure until they are sane.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places that follow the back; and of the extremities of their part from above do not accelerate to those contradictions, but rather for what is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of it is not hidden from the sentiment by which the inquiry of it is made with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be thus that it equals the fracture with the fingers according to the possible manner, until it is equalized as it was, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone in this way, if it is necessary for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs declines to the internal parts, then it accelerates to the patient vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that accelerates to one who has suffered a blow, and for what reason the bone puts forth swelling; and it accelerates to difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And thus the Antics were ingenious in that with many clever contrivances.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them it is said: they believed that the patient's belly would generate inflammation and wind, because the belly would be inflated and extended, and the fracture would be driven to the front parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We must avoid that because it would not be the cause of generating a hot abscess, if it does not accelerate; and if it does accelerate, then it helps with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said that some of them should be placed under the window and then suck with fortitude; and it is similar to rational thinking, but we, in our empire, are afraid that the window will attract the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said that some of them: the place should be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and dust powders between the ribs until it is filled, which is the binding equal to when you envelop it according to the return; and then the patient should be cured by cure of blows of wind and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes vehement constriction to the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth swelling with piercing pain, fear about the patient, then they believe that they fall on the place, discover from the broken rib, and then pause over that instrument which preserves the sign, the remembrance of which precedes, and that they inscribe the bone with facility, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with coagulation, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if it accelerates to internal abscess, then you cut and pour powders into hot rose oil and place on the area, and that the patient should be cured with what is convenient for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be raised above the bed on which they sleep, until they are sane.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some veins sometimes fracture the bones of the neck, and then they have a similar attraction, and similarly to the spine of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And with what accelerates to some and you want to know if it will be sane or not, then consider, because sometimes the veins are more mollified and stupefied and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen them and when they constrict them with the fingers or pierce them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not sane, and among the same dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you touch those areas and feel in those constricted passages with your fingers and points, then you will know that the core of the bone is healthy and that the patient's gout is being cured.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to that and want to know if it is healthy or not, then examine their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you find that it is already softened, and you see that the same thing has happened in the hands, and then when you sit on his back and feel heaviness and difficulty in their will, and sometimes they are supported on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not labor over their cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	Maybe if you don't find any cause of those things, the cause is better and more hidden.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for it is that you perform a sedation of the abscessed aposteme because it settles on the affected vertebrae or on the muscles of the back; settle on those areas several times a day until the abscessed aposteme is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply one of the comforting and exiting emplasters, and stretch over that limb; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the essence of the bone is damaged or some cause has already separated from it, then it is necessary to cut over the cord and remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, sewing if it is large; and then cure that encarnated enguentz until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Maybe if the rear of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the coccyx, then it is necessary that you introduce the finger of your left hand into the anus, and that you straighten the broken bone as much as possible for a second alignment; and then apply an emplaster and asterion, if you are skilled in those things, and then stretch that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken vertebrae in it, then you feel over that, and remove that, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the Restoration of the Narrowness.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the narrownesses are often broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is not only communicated in the extremities of those and are inserted in their length and decline to the affected parts; and it causes pain to the patient in the area and point, and the leg is stupefied when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is on the fracture which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you straighten it according to your skill for aligning until it is assembled into its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Maybe if the fracture is in the loin or has already declined to the lower parts, then you make the patient sit on their belly until it is prepared for your restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have straightened it, apply an emplaster over it, and then apply a splint of wood or cord, and tighten by stricture so that there is no point of fracture nor movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And straighten the concavity so that it fills in until it takes on the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Maybe if you find an abscessed aposteme, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscessed aposteme is sedated, and apply to it what settles according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and tighten that thus as necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you find them in the vertebrae or they are communicated, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Adjutorium.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutorium is that which is between the shoulder-blade and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which is that you take wood planks instead of middle groove according to this form.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And tie them in two extremities with two ligaments, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And sit the patient on a seat; and then you place the broken arm on the wood until it reaches the titillic of it in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is annexed.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over some heavy cause or the minister extends it to the lower parts; and then the doctor sees that the fracture is in its proper place, until the fracture returns as necessary.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other manner is that the patient is resupinated on their back and suspends the hand of the neck with a ligament; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its proper place; and the other holds it below; and each of them extends to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then stretch over the fracture with a bandage and over that another bandage, and almost all of the two ministers extending to their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	So if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is necessary that half of the bandage be placed on the citellum and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow, then it is necessary that the bandage be placed on that place and on that elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Empty that which has been facilitated and its troubles, and then quantify how it will be emptied according to what is necessary and it is applied for good application, then stretch it if you do not come across a post-trauma abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if you do come across a post-trauma abscess, then lay aside the structure until the seventh day, and place under the woolen cloth soaked in warm oil and rose oil until it rests and absorbs the abscess, and then stretch it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to stretch it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that adjuster, and place your hand held back over the surrounding muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and stretch over the adjuster to hold the arm in a steady position, so that the arm is stable, if it does not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use a stabilizer.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture a stabilizer that is more firm and stronger than the other stabilizers; and place between each stabilizer the width of a finger, and let the length of the stabilizers be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers on each side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then stretch over the stabilizers with the structure that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your structure over the place of the fracture should be more stretched.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture has been lengthened, the structure should be smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you observe the situation of the stabilizers and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its original position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a post-trauma abscess, then leave the structure and stabilizers until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not accumulate in the place of bruising or inflammation; or it is prohibited to bring nourishment to the member by means of superfluous structure; and therefore rectify everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that it does not accumulate any cause of this, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's rest be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the adjuster a full cloth of warm wool, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened, therefore rectify everything according to your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the nourishment of the patient according to the order that we have given you, in such a way that the nourishment is subtle at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then it is necessary to increase the nourishment of it.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Because the custom of the adjuster and of the leg of it is to strengthen in 40 days; and then it is necessary that they be loosened and administered a bath and medicated with ointments that rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is badly treated, then do not loosen that bandage and stabilizers for a month or until two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm bones; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small bone, from the part below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often the larger forearm bone alone is broken, or the smaller one, and often they are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small forearm bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the forearm bone is broken below the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken is the small forearm bone above, then it is convenient for the doctor, in restoring it, to make a small extension with a facilitated entrance so that it can be emptied.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger forearm bone is broken, then it is necessary to make a stronger extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forearm bones are broken together, then it is necessary that you make the external structure even stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary that you make the figure of the hand with the restoration of it and the extension extended over a pillow, and let the pulse of the hand be at the parts above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be seated on a wooden chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	It should be a cushion under him in the high chair or bed, so that the patient does not incur trouble.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then extend one minister's arm on the affected part, placing his hand there or on the limb, and another minister extends similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should bend the bone inward so that it returns to its best figure as much as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the fracture of the bone is dislocated, then you should perform reduction by pulling on the entire weight in the same place with your strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears that the dislocated part is separated from the code and it's not in your power to restore it, then you put an end to it and leave it according to the manner which we have discussed above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	Maybe the fracture is a plague, you already did it to that singular capital, and so take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if you notice an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then you lay a strip of cerate made from olive oil and white wax, and it is better between speculation and subtlety, and strengthen the strip over that subtle structure until the abscess is cleansed; and then remove the cerate and pause with an emplaster prepared from powder of mulberry in clay water, and then place stilths; and let the stilt be the one that is applied over that fracture so it may heal and become strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you will know that the number of stilts on the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one focus or in two foci together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your structure over the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when it will be more settled, the extrication to the parts above the fracture or to the lower parts of it, place the structure a little while more softly according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it at the beginning of the capital.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the strips that are wrapped around the fracture should be very humid strips, and not hard nor dry, and the thread which is strengthened should be of a middle nature, more subtly between subtle and gross, just as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament to be adjusted for some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if you find some cause for which rectification is necessary, just as you previously mentioned what has happened to the limb, and then it is necessary that you envelop the limb with warm water until that rectification ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return to the structure.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extrication is already softened and the bone is already remodeled and similar to those, then you rectify everything with your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider that maybe the nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of structure, because then it is necessary that you soften that a little and let it be for some days until it can receive the nutrition, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Maybe the patient does not find any cause among those that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to delay until about 20 days or around that.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by its natural power of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you will know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or indeed it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all this is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the strength.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the finger and toes.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You will know that the fingers of the hand and the toes are prone to fracture, and they do not occur to them unless with strong and vigorous movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or dislocation occurs in the hand, then it is necessary that the patient follows a straight line and lies down with his arm extended equally, and then place his hand on that extension.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor bends them inward so that they are congruent with good congruence.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is necessary to apply an emplaster and a stopper, if an abscess does not occur; and then place a stilt underneath according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped that in a strip of cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	Maybe the splint is in the inner parts of the fingers near the palm of the hand, and then make a strip similar to a bandage, and command the patient to strengthen that with his own splinted palm; then it will be strengthened with a long strip.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the stilt of the heart be in the strip in which it is elevated, so that the heart is applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Maybe the fracture is in the forepart, then it is necessary to place one stilt on top and another stilt of the part below in the palm, so that the hand is elevated and straightened; and then place the structure, just as the hand is revolved between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a fracture occurs at the tip of the toes, then if it is a small break, it should be wrapped according to its curve and strengthened with a bandage on the palm, and if you want, pause at the little table to elevate the fracture so it does not get worse.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Maybe the fracture is in other toes, like in the middle place, or in the index finger, or in the ear, or in the ring finger, then it should be wrapped and tied according to its shape; or if all the ties are continuous, it is better; or pause on that little table, as we have said about the pulse.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and place that, the disposition of an abscessed cautery and opposing — in the tie of the operation — in what is convenient when some cause of those occurs, according to which the narration of it is repeated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fractures of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone, when it is broken and torn apart, is declared dead according to the sensation as it is converted into the upper and lower parts.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Maybe it is propelled to the root of the thigh, then the ligament is propelled to the outer part of the knee, so that the extension remains in its place, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is propelled to the outer part, then make the ligament propelled to the outer part, and let the extension be in the lower parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor wraps the bone with both hands inside so that it reduces to its natural similarity and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then it is convenient to pause in plaster and structure, if not, the limb becomes aposteme.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	Maybe it occurs in the aposteme, then you leave it for some days until the post-apostemic abscess is calmed, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The structure of it should be done thus: it is convenient to wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and double that two or three times, and remove the superfluous part; and then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long wooden splint between the thigh and the leg near the outer part, down to the lower parts, and bring together the extremities of the splint from the upper part above both sides, and then revolve around the leg and the thigh so that it exceeds the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then pause on the thigh at the place of that fracture thus, and pause with those one stake on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill in the voids between the leg and the thigh with many cloths, so that the extrication is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong structure over the middle of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you feel that you have loosened the ligament of the place of the fracture, your structure should be less and lighter and more relaxed.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the splint to the lower parts until they reach the heel of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the stakes on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the structure over that, so that it does not occur to the corroding member or apostemic abscess or inflammation and similarly to those; and if some cause of those occurs, then cut away from the disunion of it, and rectify what occurs totally, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Maybe in the bone there is a piece of bone that has been broken, then it is convenient to wrap that according to what is possible for you; and if not, finish over it and remove that, and cure with what precedes the remembrance until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some times it is strengthened by this fracture of the thigh or other adjustments to its stakes, as we have said in the adjuster and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Maybe in the restoration of it, in such a way that it does not occur to the patient's lameness; and if it is restored alone, or another that the other leg should be applied, then it is necessary that it limps for some time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, and all that is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of fractures of the knee joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that fracture of the knee joint is difficult to heal, maybe it occurs to many times with attrition.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	When there is an accident to the fracture, then it's not just a crack or break in its parts, and that's a wound or several wounds, and above all this is what has been established as the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is also in a way that it's glued together what's broken from its parts with the inner joints until it's reunited and conjoined as much as possible for equalization and facilitation and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then stop the plaster and put it on that round steel, if you need it; and stretch underneath to the structure according to what is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, also with apostemic caution and similar to those that oppose all accidents in what is convenient for it to be healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large, and it's called by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and it's called ankle.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to some species of fracture that it happens to the two bones of the arm, and therefore it's made restoration of it just like the restoration of the arm by union, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thin bone is broken, the leg is converted into the anterior parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is broken, you will have those symptoms, and it's because of those causes that are not easily reduced.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and equalization and ligamentation of the bones according to that union.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, Emperor Cove, if the fracture of the leg is already having many painful symptoms, that the extension should be milder and less frequent, and it will alleviate your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it's when you unite the bones and complete the entire surgical operation, then you will take pieces of wood from the palm tree which were placed above the causes that were placed in solutes; and so make a splint of branches of palm; likewise take those away from the small grooves, and not be hindered by the bandages, and let it be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop it with a certain cloth in two envelopes according to its length, and put one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and so from the knee to the foot at the lowest place.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two bones in three places of two extremities and at the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right and left sides, and it stays in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then administer a wooden board according to the length of the leg; and let it be placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And moreover, Cove, you do this in fracture, and when you have that wound properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the leg and study it for further study, and you will guard it from apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and when some cause of those happens, then stop it with what Cove has taught you to be healthy.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not have complete fracture; however, the bones of the foot have some veiled fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely have fracture, and they do not have it unless it's attributed to an awkward position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot receive fracture and those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient puts their foot on the prepared earth in this way like a nest.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then put one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then calcify those, and press, and unite them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then put on plaster and stop underneath, and put below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat plates.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then stretch that around the foot in descending structure, since you have enveloped it with cloths and other causes of which you need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you will release the ligament, because you will find the bones united, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus as it is known.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are broken, then restore them, and unite them thus as you have recommended to me in the restoration of the toes of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then put the broken toe bone according to the length of the toe, and let it be bound with a little bandage; and then put below the foot this table that you have recommended, and stretch that around in descending structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	More often it happens that the bones are broken in two or three places, then you stop on any digit of this quantity wrapped in lion's drap, and stretch the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the legs of the table to hold the belly of the foot for good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to overlook that you do not consider all the causes which have been told to you in other fractures of accidents, and pause to consider each accident as if it were new.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the hip joint of the thigh and of the bone of the penis and of the wand of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip joint of the thigh is broken, then make that cesspit in the hollowed-out seat, and incline it to the back of the two small ones, and hold it from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And place the matron under the hip of the patient, and make it in the hip of him just like a spear; and place the thigh to be concuted, and elevate the back of the small one little by little, because all this is forgotten until it is inside the joint again just like a spear and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place poultices on the back of him, and when he wants to urinate, remove the patient to facilitate it and place urine, and return and reduce according to the manner in which you mixed at the beginning, and return to the first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do it thus for seven days or around that, because then it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take an egg of ovella and stretch it over the thigh of him with a cane stick; and insert all the bladder into his hip, and blow into the cane stick until the bladder is inflated inside the hip, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And place it full of patient and stay there for several days according to what we have recommended, until he is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis of man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and agglutination of what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is direct is not hidden in these proper fractures and few happen, mainly to one who has some study and use and understands my free book; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via direct restoration and in the structure of him, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	More often in the wand of the man when it is broken, take a twig of elder tree, and put the wand in that; and place poultices over the wrapping of lion's drap, and it will be wrapped, and place it to rest for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are wounded by plague.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one to whom a fracture with plague occurs, and mainly if the bone is large thus as the bone of the hip or of the adjutori, or similar to that, which you collect and remove as soon as possible if the conditions of removal are suitable for you or testify thus as we have said before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague flows with blood, then it is necessary that you collect at the retention of him in such a way that you powder on the dried-out wound, if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	More often if an abscess occurs cautiously, then you delay the restoration of him until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not approach him on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	More often if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered codena, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce it and to engulf it with your hands facilitated and with little external extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	More often if the extension is not prepared for you and the equipment of him with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands more; and it is a sturment which is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor who takes those three or four according to the quantity that he indicates in the cure of all species of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it is rounded, and it is in a small groove so that it does not double over itself during the operation hour.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it is of sharp extremity to which the margin is in the six extremities; and it is the beneath of him with a gross tendon stretching, and of the greatness of him within the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it is necessary that the extremity of him, the elevated acute point, be placed above the extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And he should be placed in a warm bath so that his bones are relaxed, and it is equalized in some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	So then forces should be applied to equalize the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the broken extremity is subtle, and do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Maybe you cannot reduce the bone to its entirety as we have recommended, then insert that into the one who governs the instruments which we have described; or it will be one of the serrations in some manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then grind that which remains in the bone of roughness and of small scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and then the reduction alleviates the patient's vehement pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer to the patient great comfort.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is completed which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in a stipptic wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the oily plague or another cause in which there is oil, so that it does not induce decay and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stelas at the time of the completion of the bone restoration, and thus uncover the plague in such a way that you insert the fork-shaped instruments and uses of enveloping according to the quantity of the plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And beware that you take all caution so as not to strengthen the plague in the fracture, because many times it makes the foolish doctors, and it ferments above the diseased mortifying or corroding wounds, so it is healthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the bone structure loosens, softens, differs from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the plague is great or it is a bad plague, and you fear about those evil accidentals that we have recommended, and it brings pain to the place, then it does not fit to pause over those astellas, maybe do adhesion with those enveloping of harsh dry draps in place of stelas and strengthen it.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when one or two days have passed since the plague began, which in it has generated a break, then you remove from underneath the drap which you had placed over that vein, and then administer calques, injecting those of our custom that we medicate the plagues, thus as we inject tetrafarmacon and similarly to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the plague in some morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and it fits that the member be prepared in such a manner that the purging corruption flows from it to the lower parts, facilitated.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes many days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from the break, then you know that here are satanisms of the small wounds because it fits to inquire into the plague in tenderness.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those satanisms, those that are separated remain and extract, those that from there are not separated and put the member and make it ache, therefore you should insert them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you reach the plague with zinc oxide or lunar caustic, it is stimulants, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then it fits to pause on one of those which convenes to him for the cure of which is preceded by narration in the previous chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that which fits to stay in the middle sermon and you make present your peace: when the bone is well-trimmed, it seems above the member just as the bone of the thigh and of the helper and similarly to those of the big members, and do not presume attraction from it, nor the extraction from it because many times it aches per that which mortifies; having thus until you purge, because strong will be your case for if then xx days or ... . And then cure the plague if you have seen it, and if there is not that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the cure of nodulation that occurs in the vestige of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times it aches this nodulation in the vestige of sanitation of fracture, and moreover that it is near the joints, and it is ordained by the figure of the member; and strongly it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the nodulation is recent and administer in those medicines that have stipulated thus as aloen, and enses, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similarly to those; in such a way that you take some of those or all, and combine them am vi stip, or am album of huou, or am vi agree, and pause that over the nodulation in estopa, and constrict those over it for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the extrication not dissolve that for many days; and then dissolve it and iterate another, until the nodulation is removed; or strengthen over that lamina of lead decentment, because lead has the property to remove all that which is inflated in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the disease has turned into a stone and becomes strengthened and it is necessary to provoke an evacuation of that accumulation, and then divide it into parts with superior abundance and prominence, or make a hole in order to expel it; and take care that what remains is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then returns to its Roman [normal] subtle member, freed from secondary damage according to its own natural law.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of bone is restored, and then returns to its normal subtle member, it is not done except for many causes: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligament and the bonding of the broken part not according to its natural course; or due to excess of structure in the ligaments so that nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the member; or due to multitude of superfluous embrocation; or due to excessive movement not at its proper time; or due to lack of health in the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the care of this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender so that health may be multiplied in them; and administer baths; and put gypsum and lettuce on them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then pause the poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to it the necessary nourishment, or continues embrocation with warm water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the care of broken bones when they are restored incorrectly and prohibit the operation of their own that is proper.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to a member that is restored with the healing of its crookedness and eminence to the broken bone and node, and it is because of the deformity of the form of the member, but meanwhile the member does not prohibit its own natural operation, then it is not proper that you receive the word of him who says that this member was newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Many have been foolish doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth; and this operation is very reprehensible, producing great fear of the sign which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Many times stiffness and node are recent, then it is proper that they be embrocated with warm water in which they collect softening herbs, thus as they are fuels of high virtue and roots of the same, and melilot, and similar to those; and let it be made a plaster with mollifying emplaster, thus as it will be well done; or that it takes mucilage of root of high virtue and is mixed with grey gauze or oil of cirami, and is embrocated there; or that they take fat figs and are trussed in females' colostrum, and similar to those of the medicines which are named merman's consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some times it is dissolved in frequent friction of the ligature that is in the most humid places, and let there be administration of movement to the member at every hour.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Many times crookedness has gone inside and is made strong and converted into stone and provoked necessity for care of it with iron, then it is proper that the pus be evacuated from above and the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and let there be incised what superfluously nods to that meter in the bone at subtle incisions, and let there be administered facilitation in that which is solicited and studied.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On sermon in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from their proper place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is altered, and brings great pains and lesions to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when it happens to a dislocation, then it is proper to perform reduction as soon as possible, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes apostemated and very strong with what is made difficult the reduction of dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is not proper to touch or stretch at the time of apostematization, because many weakened fibers come to produce spasm and severe pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Many times when it happens, then it is proper that you fall back to the flaccidity of the patient, and then let it be relaxed until the apostema subsides; and then the member is embrocated with warm water and oil, and then it is reduced with facilitation.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member is cared for with water of which the remembrance will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And thus I have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been preceded in fracture; from the superior part of the body down to the inferior part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the care of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Thus the two jawbones are dislocated if not treated; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two manners: either they are returned to their places with little remotion, and thus softened a little; or they are fully dislocated and completed, until they are softened at the joint so that saliva flows from the patient's mouth and they cannot hold it nor clear their mouth, and their tongue is enveloped in its speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	More when the dislocation of it is little, then in major arrangements it returns to itself for a little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it is necessary that reduction of the limb be administered immediately, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and inserts his fingers into the open mouth to reset the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers at the same time, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands are placed before them so that they engage; and he commands the patient to release their jaws and withdraw from any quarter; and the minister resets the jaw and pushes it back into place until it returns to its proper location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until the limb makes the reduction of both, and does not delay the reduction of both at all, thus as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And thus when they return and are reset, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then pause on those pillows of drap cloth soaked in cerate, and be made with wax and oil rubbed; and it is fitting to facilitate the ligaments more.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be stationed between two aurelhes, so that it does not incline to the right or left; and do not force them to grasp anything, lest they cause some harm; having the gentle food forbidden, until when the pains are alleviated and the jaws are numb, then let them eat what they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that is administered to facilitate, and do not trouble about the perception of the mouth unless eating and drinking and citation, until the jaw is numb and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and not converted to their proper places, then apply many vegetable acids and assiduous soda, and strengthen the patient's belly with a ligature, and strengthen it and vomit pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, then know that it is perdition; and many vegetable acids die for the one to whom that acid agrees in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The ankle is not dislocated from its joint due to its continuity with the foot; and some acids are dislocated at the forefront, and that is declared by the symptom.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then bind the area with your palm in strong binding, so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then pause on that plaster and pillows, and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of one who has seized the thigh and is continued with it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and reset according to what we have said and according to what appears to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on that plaster, and pillows, and extrication, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this treatment, the reduction of the extremity of the muscle is made when it is separated from its proper place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is dislocated from the top to the bottom.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from the top of the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not dislocated at the back parts because of the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts because of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And especially it is dislocated and beforehand exits at the bottom parts because of the titillic, and especially in those where the flesh is little, the limb is dislocated; but in those where there are many fleshes, it is exited with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And strongly it agrees to some men percussion or cauterization, and the patient's muscle is apostematized with caution, and it is cajoled for that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you spread this out until you are above-certified about it, and then proceed with the cure of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation of it is at the bottom parts because of the titillic; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the whole muscle, because you find differences manifest among them; and you find in the head of the concave muscle below the titillic from the touch of the head of the muscle as if it were a vacuum, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to the proper aurelhe, nor can they move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the foot is displaced or turned inwards, then you will clearly see the deformity, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this displacement, make gentle reduction when it is fresh and the patient is in infancy.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises their hand to the upper parts; and then pause with the whole weight on them, and raise the joint with strength in its own place, and the minister raises their hand, and extends it thus, so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Perhaps because of what we have said does not return, and thus from the beginning that causes the dislocation, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered a gentle embrocation that mollifies and soothes, as if it were a coating of fenugrec, and melillot in water, and it is administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back with their foot elevated and supported by pillows, waiting for the swelling to subside between relaxation and contraction, and then the doctor places their hand on the affected area, raising the head of the muscle in a straight line, and touches the patient's hand so that it is not bent towards the lower parts, and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it is not bent towards the lower parts, until it returns to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you should be present at home where the patient is lying, and stand on the side of the bed, and insert your hand under the patient's muscle below the foot, and raise the foot to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the lower parts of their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Perhaps the patient is gentle, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended, so that gravity affects it, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this way: and it is that a long stick with a rounded head of a moderate size, like a mason's pole, not too thick or too thin, be fixed in the ground; then place the patient on top of the stick, stretching their hand to the lower parts of the other side; and extend the body of the patient from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its proper place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the length of two arm's spans, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted at the end of the foot according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place the rounded head on it, so that the stick does not slip from the patient's hands.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place it on the patient's foot, and extend their hand or arm over the stick up to the lower parts, and tie the stick to the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a ladder of steps according to the width, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the other body is suspended from the other side, so that the joint enters quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrumentation of it is completed according to whatever method is possible for you, and then it is necessary that you place below the foot a quantity of swelling; and then prepare an plaster made of powder of molybdenum and album of egg white over all the muscle, as if it were revolved from above, and then strengthen below the foot with decent contraction; and the ligament is revolved over the plaster, and the hand of it is attached to the neck of it, and it is raised, and it should not be bent for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary that the food of the patient be suspended for a little while, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to bring about their health.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more abundantly after seven or eight days, and exercise some movement; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	Perhaps the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it is necessary that a cautery be administered in three tracts, according to what was said in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and seven days have passed, the ligament and joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and contraction are reduced on several occasions, and it is not strengthened and cannot be elevated to the upper parts, then you will know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either numb or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done from the foot and the thigh or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And it should be administered in that other strict structure, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens that the healing is weighed down in the limb and slowed down in its movement, then the patient uses many worn-out remedies until that weight is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, especially from the front part to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden when you feel the movement or touch according to some figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip in this way, it is manifestly declared, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the surrounding muscles.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is covered that the hips are reduced, and the dislocation is reduced as soon as possible before it reaches a critical point, because if it reaches a critical point, difficult is the reduction of it, and hardly can it be fully healed; especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many worn-out remedies are used in that case, almost to the point of death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it should be extended in two ways, and the arm of it should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are placed over the hip and below it, and the fingers of its hand envelop the joint with the tips of its palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	Moreover, if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus that the hand doubles over its own hand, until it strikes the hip with the tip of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and very strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that equipment with two ministers so that it is not removed from there during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then the arm is revolving from all parts, because it is enveloped in a double layer of cloth wrapped around its hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, until he feels some oil for that purpose so that it is those causes that help in lubricating the joint to facilitate; and then he wraps the joint with a strong wrapping until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of it is that it should be placed on that paste in which it is stipulated and exception made in album of urine, and it should be extracted with a strict descending structure, and the arm should be suspended from the pillar, and it should be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is dislocated; and therefore if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you remove the bandage of it and leave it like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you repeat the paste and bandage, and leave it like that for some days until it is extracted; and then you remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Moreover, if it happens that the weight is administered for the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidity in baths and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or place on the joint a heating poultice, so it is fomented with a warm motion; and then it is bound, and left like that on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put it in a bath; and when it sweats, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then place it on that heating poultice, so it is rounded by motion, once, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in a bath instrument, until it is clean.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place on that moist and scaled area of the cow's skin in a wrapping and stretch over it; and do this several times, because it is moist and reduces its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder of the hand sometimes becomes dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and conversely it is with other joints, but especially because velocity is needed in the reduction of it at the hour in which it is dislocated, lest the place become critical or something happens to the critical point.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends his hand, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint, and wraps it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Moreover, it is necessary to consider if the palm has been placed at the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding from the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that one should be precisely over the table, so that the doctor's hand falls upon that vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	Therefore, if it returns soon, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that part with an ointment, and let it be there; and do not touch it, because if not, you will not feel nor put weight on the reduction of pus that passes to the days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Maybe the Roman emperor is according to his tortuousness; and do not notice in the patient any cause, but rather that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are weakened or shrunk, and then it is not generated in him unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the improvement of his case and to confer strength on his conferring cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the sickness is returned, then stop over the ointment which we have recommended, and let it be there and strengthened for five days; and then it will be dissolved and let it be there, and the patient's hand will be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Maybe if the movement of it is stopped and stuck in some gravity, then apply that with warm water and friction on certain veins, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some veins are dislocated from the fingers to the entire joint.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger is dislocated from those at the palm or belly of the hand, then hold the finger and push back the dislocation with the tied poultices, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it be there for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in that seventh day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to dissolve it in the day and exercise its movement, and lay it at night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similarly to this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and lay it at that joint and do the first operation on the poultice, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other joints.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, a complete dislocation, and so many vertebrae are moved from their places, then there is no cure, because death follows the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And it is sign of this that the evacuation of the patient is beyond their will, and cannot retain it; and many veins are mollified in some members of his or two legs of his or two arms of his, or one of those; or a vertebra is moved from its place, because many veins are moved and many veins are made to make the movement of those in four joints.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that has already been moved to the back parts and is called gelbozitation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Maybe the cure of it is that then you consider if the gelbozitation happens from weakness, because then there is no cure nor healing of all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Maybe in that which is seen by chance or by percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients already said the ways of cure are verbose, from which the most returns with profit; maybe you have already heard and abbreviated from that which I have little excuse for the trope of his, for my proximity to the intention of my exposition, in which I have explained and formed diverse instruments of that which I will show and expound.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in gelbozitation which happens from the front to the foot, there is no generation nor healing of that; and similarly in that which is done at two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, none are cured except for the one that happens in the back properly, as I have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face above a soft pillow, and be extended below his instrument as much as possible so that the foot of his is not hindered.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the extremity of the pillow around his head, and another stick in the air above his feet at the other extremity of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the servant should hold the stick, and not be fixed in a pit; and another servant should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then envelop above the head of the patient and below the small linen wraps firmly; and extend the extremity of the wrap to the stick which is at the head of his, and lay it on him; and then strengthen the other wrapping over his hips with his denials, and around his legs; and then adjust all the wrappings and lay them on the other stick which is at his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the servant should carefully extend the wrapping to the part of the stick, and do not move the two sticks and the wrappings from their fixed places in which they are fastened, maybe the emperor does not fix them thus as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor stops his hands on the spinal column for strength until it returns, or stops on that one table, and then adjusts on the table both feet until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Perhaps if it does not return in this way, then take a table on which the width or length is in the air of three handbreadths, and hollow out the side of the table where we have said the patient's thigh should enter into the extremity of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then stop the flat part of the table on the spine, and the doctor stops both feet on the other extremity, and stretches it until the spine is straightened and returns to its own place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, take the one that is turned around with your hand; and it is that you place on the ground the head of the patient's thigh at the back of two feet, the length of which should be an arm's length, and the head of it at the back of two feet just the same; and let the length between each foot be a palm, and already it is made in each foot through which the course turns, and each one is firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a fixed foot in which the course turns, and let it be turned around in the two tracks of the two feet.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And on the extremity of it there is a track in which the foot is formed, the length of which is a palm and a half that is turned around; and on the two other feet it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then stretch the ligaments that have been stretched on the chest of the patient in the course which is from the head of it, and the ligaments that have been stretched on its thighs in the turn which is from its feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then there is a turn and stays a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor adjusts the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then since the spine is returned, and the place is adjusted, then you should apply a plaster of egg white on the album of skin, and then stop; and then stop over the plaster like a table with a width of three fingers or around that, and its length being the quantity that takes the place of the gibosity, and on the part of the spine itself.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then it is relaxed in the ligament which we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment until he is healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains some impediment in the place at the end of the healing, then you should administer medicines that mollify and soften with an administration on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a laminate of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some evil accidents occur in the back of the spine of the two, and it is judged for that dislocation; and it is that bone which already warned you so that you do not think to make a promise to him with this medicine, because strong fear will make you consent to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the cure of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not deviate unless there is a dislocation only, and it does not occur to those which occur to other joints with small movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inside parts, or to the front parts, or to the inner parts, or to the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated to the inside parts, and rarely to the inner parts or to the back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation of it to the inside parts is that, when you adjust the healthy leg of the patient with the diseased leg, it is then longer and the denudation is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot from the ankle, and it is the place where the ligament becomes apostematized by an apostema-causing cautery, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the front parts is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the inner parts is that it expands the foot according to its own complement, but meanwhile it does not bend because of the pain that is in the denudation, and if it is perforated to go out and cannot walk on those inner parts; and its urine is retained and its ligament is apostematized, and its walking is on the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the back parts is that it does not expand the denudation, nor can it bend that denudation which bends the ligament, and its leg is shorter than the other, and the ligament is mollified, and the head of the thigh is in that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Perhaps the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been antiquated with what you have administered to him, and you should reduce it according to its own disposition, then it is not in that complete cure; and therefore you do not think to make a promise about that.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should strive to return the joint to its proper place and extend it to the posterior and anterior parts, and move it neither to the right nor left, because strong leverage returns it and does not require another kind of cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the posterior part, or hold their hands, or bind what is tied above the knee; and another minister extends the hand of that one on the other side so that they hold the little fingers of theirs; and you strengthen a ligament over the joint of the thigh, and hold another minister to straighten the extremity of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is an extension of it or from the posterior part to the angle of the shoulder blade, or from the posterior part to the back, or from behind to the back of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is an extension of all these in one way, so that the patient is elevated on their back with their legs on the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that require their own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the posterior parts, you should resupinate the patient on their back with their legs raised; and then pause the ligaments over the joint of the thigh in that place where the head of the thigh and the place below the shoulder blade meet; and then extend the ligament from above the angle of the shoulder blade to the further posterior part of the spine.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister takes hold of their arms, and embracing the large joint of the patient's thigh, extends to the anterior parts for vigorous extension, because that returns it to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of lighter cure, in which this member is reduced more easily than the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused above you and does not obey the entrance to this species of cure at all, then you should bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong ligature, lightly, over both ankles and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And it is the length of each one by the quantity of four fingers, and the patient's leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient is suspended over the top of a pole, and that he is in a balance; and it is the length of it from the ground by the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to move the head of the thigh, and it is suspended with the patient another youth, and the other youth moves the thigh with strong and empiric force, because the joint returns to its proper place with velocity.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the anterior part, you should make the patient sit on a stool according to what we have recommended in the preceding chapter; and strengthen the ligament over the patient's own leg properly and over their feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two poles are placed, one at their feet, and the other at the head; and then two adjusted poles are fixed on the middle of the peg, upon which drips humid sponges are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the pole being between their thighs, so that the extension to the posterior parts is not attracted.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor places his hand on the patient's hand to guide the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if it obeys to reverberation, it will be good greatly; and if not, pause over that diligently and thus as we have said in the preceding chapter for that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But you should make the patient sit on their back quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then you should make the leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this method of narration about the peg; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the patient's shoulder blade, and then cuts off that with the other hand, and in that cutting-off pauses the extension to the posterior parts at the back of the spine.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then you should not make the patient be extended to the posterior parts, and it is elevated from the ground; having paused because of hard cause, thus as you should examine if their ankle is dislocated to the anterior parts, according to what we have said about the examination of it on two anchors; and it is over their face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no error.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And you should administer compression on the table over the place where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed according to what you should do — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient's leg is strengthened and expands those excuses, then you know that the member has returned according to what you should do — and then you adjust both thighs and pause in a bandage and strengthen with a strip so that the ankle is not weakened in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then release the ligament and the paste, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those signs in the vestment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore leave the patient alone afterwards.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see some cause of softening, then you return and apply a plaster to that, and stretch it according to your primary structure, and leave it like that for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release that, and make it wait in ambulation over some crutches for some days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated forward, and backward, and downward more than upward; and it is not dislocated inward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to bend their leg towards the thigh; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is to make the patient straighten up, and if they can extend their leg, then put it on that; attach the two hands to the face of it, and place their foot between the two hands; and then make them attach the shoulder to their palms, and hold those between the two hands placed on the shoulder with strength, and another minister extends their foot until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction of it is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a lifted and labor-free way.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a plaster to that and make them attach the leg to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk about for some days, until they are healthy and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension on the ligaments of those in the cure of the preceding narrative's wound.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the cure of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes is removed by small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either backward or forward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that the ankle becomes swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure of the movement of it is by gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with facilitation on the hands and be bent until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure of it when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient straighten up, and hold that with a strong and valiant minister from behind the two hands on the middle place of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you put your right hand straight on the foot above the ankle, and your left hand below the foot at the place of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then you pull the foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two movements, and then extend with your left hand; and you will find the foot of the leg in its proper place.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that twice according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then you will find the foot of the leg in its proper place at the third movement, and you are at the heel.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one movement or in two according to this method, and if the foot is bent, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it in the way that we have recommended, then make the patient sit on their two feet on the ground, and stretch a strap firmly on the ground, and place it between the thighs of it, and you have already wrapped around it with a cloth so that the patient does not move.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a ligament that lies on the top of the foot; and then extend each minister against the extension of the other side, and the strap is extended between the thighs of the patient holding it, so that the body of it is not pulled towards the lower parts beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh below, so that the dislocation returns to its facility.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause and apply a plaster strongly, and bind the foot with a ligament to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful that you do not touch or guard the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the ligament on it is not violent and holds it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, extend it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove that from the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from strenuous activity for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Perhaps it is forgotten to anaesthetize that space, it is not safe that the dislocation is not on top of it dissolved and corrupted, and then do not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you reach the acute aposteme, then you should administer in the sedation of that water in which our narration precedes, in another place of treatment and of embrocation, until it is removed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that what is dislocated be reduced with little extension of its strength; and that which is not difficult, therefore it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	Perhaps the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient sit with their foot on the ground or on a table, and stand thus as if they were going.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on feet, and stop the foot on that which is imagined from the joints, and then calcify that in the foot in a virtuous manner until it returns, and you see that already reduced and does not appear in the eminent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then stop below the belly of the foot on a table that holds the entire foot, to which are two cups, and then strengthen it in a decent structure and firm for three days; and then remove that and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the species of dislocation that are made by plague or fracture or any other evil encounters.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you reach some cause of those, and you persevere in the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, many expected successes follow, avoiding death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason it is not necessary to presume on the treatment of the patient, but rather one who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and pitied, tardy, not arrogant nor presumptuous; and who uses in the beginning of medicines that calm apostemes as much as possible, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but rather to whom they hope for salvation from perdition, with alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore it is necessary to strive so much for the reduction in the beginning of the cause, since then the acute aposteme will be avoided.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And therefore if the member returns according to what we want, then administer a regimen that calms the acute aposteme and cures the plague with what is convenient for the joints of the dried-out limbs.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and reaches the separated sacred bones, then you perform the statement of theirs, and do in that what we have said in the simple maladies of that which is preceded in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and escape according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear as it has been preceded by my preaching; for that is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your cosmos truly existing in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the paragraphs of Albucasim perfectly, of which God may be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
