Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the remedies of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for its completion and its consequences in it, and for its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that you will complete what I have written in this treatise, which is a part of my operation with my hand, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the operation with my hand is spread throughout our region and in our time of total privacy, until it has fortified the science of it, and its vision has been stopped; and I do not remain silent about it except for some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the waters and lead to those errors and hesitations until the intentions of it are closed and its force is elongated.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you will vivify this ordering of this treatise in the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may come to the forms of the instruments of cautery and of other tools of the work as it is for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why no artificial hand is found in this our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and it covers the skillful actor who has been exercised in the science of anatomy which Galen understood until he knew the juices of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their position; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their sensation.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hippocrates said that a name is not enough, but rather in the small work, and more in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already said that in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not exempt from falling into error, for which many men die, thus you have seen many of them, because they are formed in this science and get away from it, and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has attempted to incise an scrophilous aposteme on the neck of a woman, and has cut some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed until the woman almost died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who promised that he would remove a stone from a man's bladder which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone in a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called it a futile effort to extract that, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and because of the disposition of the patient's body, I knew that he would die under my hands.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he made a bad incision on the patient's leg which was broken in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, above the wound, with pincers and tongs, with strong traction, and did not leave the wound to heal.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then I dislocated the joint according to their desires, and then I relaxed it, and then I left it for several days and commanded that they should not move the limb; and it was thus until the thigh and foot were apostematous, and I came to a loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have already called it a futile effort to him, and I had dislocated the limb, and consequently it was tranquilized and thus relieved of its pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to spread the corruption in the limb until the patient's condition worsened.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous aposteme, and it became ulcerated after several days, until the evil of it was magnified in his lord's sight.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cancerous aposteme was pure of melancholic humor, and then it did not cover how it would come to him in entirety, but rather it was a member which suffered from everything, as if it had been besieged.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with my hand be divided into two devotions: one is an operation associated with health, and another is a work in which there is danger in major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed everywhere in this book where I found operating in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to watch over this and leave that, so that the fools do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And then take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are fallen and are confirmed.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God to lose salvation and laudable success, and leave the terrible evils of difficult healing, and stop using your arms of that which makes you fear, so that it is established in your faith and in your name you are not evasive: because more remains of your glory, and afterwards in the world and lastly in your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Some people daily drink from certain sacred springs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"There is no bad medicine for a bad patient, because bad doctors are not named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have devoted this book to three chapters."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the furnishings of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"The division of the second part."
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter, on scarification and perforation, and on cupping glasses, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrowheads and on similar things, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"The division of the third part."
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twisting and on similar things; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"On cauterization by fire and acute medicine and reminiscence of the operation."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"At this point begins the treatise on the entire book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"I have described the quality of the juices of that cautery and its instruments, and in what complexions it is prohibited to use cauteries."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juice of cauteries and its instruments is a long and prolix sermon, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant, and to me it seems sufficient to take a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"Therefore I say that cauteries conform universally to all complexions, which is a matter or several matters, except for two complexions, which are cold complexions without matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"In the cold and dry complexions there is a disagreement; for some said that cauteries are useful for those, and others said the contrary, that cauteries are not convenient in illnesses which are by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that cold and dry illnesses are healed by cauteries which are hot and dry."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And I say to him who says the contrary, that by cauteries it is made a remedy in all cold and dry illnesses that are found in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies with their humidity to the complexion of fire, you find that men's bodies are cold."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say by the sermon of that, that experience has already taught me many times to discover."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"Moreover, I do not think that it is necessary to speak about that which has already been experimented and exercised in the chapter on cauteries by last exercise, and to know the diversity of complexions in men's bodies and the disposition of illnesses in their metesises, and the causes of those, and the accidents of those, and the space of time for those."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"Moreover, in the other complexions, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and humid illnesses, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree on the remedy with cauteries in those."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cauteries is fire and its goodness, so concerning cauteries as a burning medicine, it is because fire is simple, the action of which does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not reach another member unless it is adjusted with a small benefit."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"Moreover, the action of burning medicine penetrates to that in the members where it is needed, and makes them come to the ailing member with difficult healing and makes them hear."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"Moreover, fire, by its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do anything except to overflow; and it is already known to us through experiment and long service of study in the art about the truth of causes; and for that I have been excused from the length of the sermon; and if it were not that I did not leave my book open in this passage to you, secretly hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion through which it expels illnesses, a philosophical sermon demonstrated, which would be acute in your feet."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, sons, that they disagree on the time at which it is convenient to use cauteries and pause at the best time of spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cauteries are convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the remedy of that which has been attracted by cauteries, and especially if cauteries are for pains or necessary pains, strong and steadfast, which do not suffer tardiness because they fear those that bring evil, which is greater than small harm entering through time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And thus you do not catch in your feet, or, sons, that which they do not esteem except the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that illness which is healed by cauteries, it is not returned to all time, and pauses at that consequence."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not so much in the skin as in the cold humors that alter the complexion and dry out the humidity which is the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Perhaps emperor's cauteries are excessive in medicine, to show off the value and truth of their operation and greatness of his noble lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his malady returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his malady, and the truth of it, and what is prepared in the course of his body by the aggregation of excessive heat in him, and what has come to him through his acquisition of vices and similarities to those causes; but that the malady in which cauteries are administered is a subtle malady in a member with few excessive heat and humidity, thus as cauteries of teeth for pain and similarity to that, it is possible that in him there will not return that pain, but rather it will be made small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is a common saying that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it in him, for they believe that it is not a cure that profits from medicine nor another cause that profits from cauteries.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is in contrast to that; and the intention that cauteries are the last resort of medicine is not but when we administer many ways of cure in certain maladies, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause, one administers thus cauteries, and profits from that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And henceforth I reject the idea that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that gold cauteries are better than iron cauteries, and they didn't say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cauteries does not make a breach, as if it is not absolutely true, because you already have it and have experienced that it does not do this except in certain bodies, and cauteries are good and better than iron, just as they said; but when you make cauteries with a focus of gold, it is not for you to declare, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust on the ignition it makes the gold flow into the focus, and sometimes in the focus certain layers so that the artisan can take advantage of it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore it is done to make iron cauteries, we must push lightly and more profoundly into the right direction of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And now I have ordered this chapter on cauteries according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that the demanding one knows what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauteries for pain in the head due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness about the sudden accident of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of swelling and multiple fluxes of rheumatic flow, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the veins and ears fluent, and multiple sleeping, and of toothache and gout, and universally of all maladies that come from coldness, thus as paralytic, swooning, and apoplexy, and similarly in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to be evacuated from medicine by a mild evacuating remedy for three or four nights, according to the truth of the patient's virtue and his age and his custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then it commands him to shave his head with a razor, and then to sit between his thighs on a heated bench and place his hands over his own feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then he places the razor in the palm of his hand, then puts it on the razor's edge between the nostrils of his nose.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perhaps emperor, as the finger of my middle finger has arrived, it signs that place with tension, and then ignites the olive oil cautery of which this is the form.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then he places it on the tender spot with tension, in a manner that descends, in which the finger of my hand is constricted little by little, and you revolve it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then he lifts his hand lightly and regards the spot, and if you see already some quantity of head being discovered, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then he lifts his hand, and if it does not return to that iron, another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by him what I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place it on the wrapped cloth in a bundle and leave it there until the scar of the focus is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the spot with four-part medication until it is healthy.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the Roman plague was lifted, so much better did I get the arm, because it is better and more jovial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They should burn some of those that are to be cauterized on the outside of the bone, and hold the cautery so that it is adhered to some part of the bone's specificity.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then return it to its adjustment on the bone, and then it will be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They should burn others with the cautery penetrating deeply, so that it enters the bone strongly and grips the bone firmly, and this is the method of small alleviations.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They esteem that from that place issue the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And it will be held in the open wound for a long time, and then it will be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two special kinds of cauteries at all, unless in some homes according to the way of fear; and thus, you see, my better health is due to salvation, when it is; because the head is revealed by solution of continuity with the aforementioned, as we have testified in the other members, and especially since the head of the patient is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the species of cauteries first mentioned is most safe and better for me; and from that house and in that work I am healthy.
Capitol segon.	It follows accordingly.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the whole head is affected by chronic and long pain and it is in prolonged illness, and uses remedies of poultices and of bandages and of cupping glasses and of emplasters and of ointments and of catheters and of gauzes, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that recounts and does not provide relief from any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and troubled by great cold, then that cauterying with another cautery below that one is insufficient.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauteries that one on the horn of the seven-headed beast with a cautery until the bone is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and uncover the part of the bone that we have recounted and cauteries that with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place called "vas" — and it is that place where the windy pause is made.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in that way, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient will suffer great diverse pain from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you will direct this cautery to its place, because it is necessary that the cautery which is being used to cauteries the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtly applied than that which is cauterized in the middle place of the head; and this is the method of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-ancient migration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the head's part, or it is extended pain to the eye, it should be evacuated with medicines that mondiginate the head, and another cure should be administered, which you have mentioned in the treatises on illnesses; and if nothing helps, then cauterying is done in two ways: either cauterying with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The cauterying with acute burning medicine is that you take a handful of salt, and scrape it off and bind the extremities of it to both heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it reaches the hidden bone, until it is concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen it over the place where it is stopped by constant constriction, and thus leave it for three hours; and then remove it and extract the salt, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then pause on the submerged edge in a bandage until the place forms a crust.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that one with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see, do as I have written about some burning medicines which I have described in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cauterying with iron is done according to this method: ignite the iron for cauterying, of which this is the form.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus like a form of nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the acidity which is beneath is not adhered — and turn the small iron slowly with velocity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is adhered to the specificity of the bone thus as its magnitude, and lift your hand so that the artery is not adhered to the one beneath, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then dip the edge in salt water and pause it on the place, and leave it for three days; and then pause the edge much in a bandage, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cautery the extremity of the cutter according to the cautery, and beware of incision of the artery in this non-ancient migration properly.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cautery of ancient migratory diseases.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migratory diseases in the way that we have spoken of previous treatments, and in the divisions of the illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes due to the illness that does not allow for what we have said about the first cautery in medicine or in fire cautery, then it is necessary that you ignite the cuticular cautery until it is whitened, because it signifies on the line of long duration of the same magnitude, or that which; and pause your hand for a while and strengthen it until you incise the artery and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves are not damaged in such a way, and that there is no spasmodic contractions.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is constricted, because in the constriction of it there is fear, and greater harm to him who ignores what he does and is not skilled and experienced; and thus the operation begins with him at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will find a remedy in the memory of the regulation of blood flow accidents in the artery, according to the usual method, in the same place of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and the body of the patient is tolerable, then cautery it in the same place on the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of arteries with cautery having two handles, and it is a better cautery for this and more convenient.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with causal remedies and another treatment which has been said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has been named punctual, of which this is the form.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And point the cautery at the ignition, and it should be led around the entire ear as if it were being turned, or in a circle of any shape if the pain is anywhere.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Also, I will teach you about the cautery of the root of the ear, little by little, because you should sensibly touch the place with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you make points of cautery in the entire ear, and thus it is, and then cure the places until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of gout.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Gout, which is treated and cured with cautery, is not only of the species that come through flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of the illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	It requires cautery of the species that proceeds from dryness or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of gout with herbs and head purges and gargles, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary that you cautery the patient with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the same temple, and the third at the joint of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery for the opposite of the affected part, because mollification is not seen except in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cautery is that you cautery it with the cautery at the right of the extremity of the ear, slightly above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the aforementioned finger, and pause your hand on the cautery until the quantity of the magnitude of the species of the codena is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of cutting, the form of which is demonstrated on the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more subtle because that one is a little thus as you see; and it is necessary to cut in it with excessive abundance a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place where it is demonstrated, until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter seven.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not succeed and the patient has no fever, then cautery it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the same place on the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And then it is cautered on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more hidden; and then it is cured with what proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter eight.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cautery of forgetfulness caused by flux.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It seems that the treatise describes a medical procedure. Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Capitol .ix.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Capitol .x.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Capitol .xi.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then stop that constricted bowel in the bodier or in greyish-greenish areas of the gut.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	About the cauterization of water descending into the wheel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the commencement of water in the wheel through the signs which you had said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient who is afflicted with that which moistens his head, and guard against total humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sugar dissolve in water for some days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery on the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the commencement of watering in two wheels, or one side if it is the commencement of water in one wheel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Including the veins and arteries which are beneath the codeina; and you will place the cauteries in that long length at the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, or stop the flow with some medicine, which is as much as possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the excision of those and caution against fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized at the neck beneath two bones with two cauteries, producing derivative effects.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	About the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the wheels are old and assuaged and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before, and it is verified that this is superfluous fluid matter, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter about the commencement of water flowing from the wheels, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on the neck beneath two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck beneath two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you find indication of addition, then cauterize that on the entire side of the wheel above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	About the cauterization of foul odor of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate that with what we have said in the division and do not hasten your medication, then prepare and give to drink to the patient the cochias for three nights; and then shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery, mingling a cautery of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a cautery nail and two cauteries on the two eyebrows beneath the hair, a small one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery that you do not injure it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the cautery nail, this is the method.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	About the cauteries of softening of the eyelids of the wheels.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the wheel is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery and this cautery is lunar; and this is its method.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so, cauterize that above the two eyebrows, a small one with two cauteries in the entire affected part, and then elongate from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	About the cauteries of the eyelid of the wheel when the hairs are converted into the inner parts and puncture the wheel.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the wheel are converted into the inner parts and puncture the wheel, cauterize in those cases according to two methods, because the cautery is either with iron or with medicine combined.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to place that beneath the wheel so that they can burn those hairs thus as those which are worldly, until they are prolonged and engulfed; and if you puncture that of his lord's naysement, then strengthen the wheels of it with a band so that it is not moved until the hairs are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Since they are born and engulfed, then stop the head of the patient in the tieu seat, and place a sign above the eyelid of the wheels of it with a tent, making a signal according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and let it be the commencement of the proper signal of the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then stop constricted bowel in album of Huou or in mucilage of ptilli above the wheel.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cauteries of which this is the method.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize above the figure which has been signified, little by little, in well-veiled motives, until the surface of the codeina is burned, which is thus as a leaf of myrtle, entirely apparent properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	It seems that the sentence should be translated to:
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	So lift your hand and let it stay there for three days, and then place your hand on the outer thigh to eradicate the scar.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that wound thoroughly so that it may be healthy.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the skin returns to its former condition for some reason and the eyelid becomes swollen, then do another time the cautery on that entire area as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it returns to its natural location and is equalized, so that the skin does not press on the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift the skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a sheet of paper in the form of a leaf of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap made from congealed goose fat and living worm oil. I think there may be a mistake in the original text. The phrase "caus viva" doesn't make sense, and "worm oil" is unlikely to be a real medical ingredient. Here's the translation:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little and do not move it until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, because the biting is in it thus as from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then as you perceive that the strong biting begins, then remove the medicine and wash your finger in water; then when the biting ceases, then remove the medicine from the eye with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted thus as it was washed from the constriction of fire or incision, because then it will be; and if it does not return to that place where the medicine was not applied and does not become discolored until your operation is equalized and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand on the outer thigh to eradicate the swelling of the adjustment, and then heal that wound thoroughly or otherwise until it is healthy.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, from your operation to keep diligent vigilance so that in the eye no residue of the medicine falls, and if the eyelid after several days is swollen and some cause of the skin presses on the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is swollen, and properly thus as you did at the beginning, and then heal it thoroughly until it is healthy.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of myrtle leaves.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and thus according to what was done your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it will not be misleading the way of direct treatment for he who is studying in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of illnesses and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary to cauterize it thus in this manner: command the patient to place his head in a warm place, and hold the head of some minister between their eyes in such a way that it is not moved nor agitated by the warm head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place cotton wadding in an album of wool or in a mesh of little threads over the eye of it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be conical, thus as it is in the form of a reed or a point of a wing, from one extremity to which the cautery was made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it should penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out thus as it was intended.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But I think that one who is skilled in this art is better at the third age.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then take out the fistula if it is opened, and draw out its humor and dry that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then operate on that and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on the eye the cautery which was ignited, and you have that in the warm hand a little away from the cautery of the eye to the parting of the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the gray areas of the eye and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then at the beginning of the eye's cautery, you see into the bone, it is; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if it is necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then place on the outer thigh to eradicate and wrap it in a thoroughly dried poultice until it is healthy.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been passing eleven days and there is no health, then stop using the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the seventh chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another manner of cautery for fistula, which first-time doctors use: then at the place of the fistula and make a hole in it, and place a subtle instrument like a thin rod; and put in it a quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand firmly with good retention, and do not let the patient move so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the hollow of that; and cover the hollow of the patient's body with albumen or egg white, or water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and the cure, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the body of the nose, as it will come into its own location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the fracture of the toes.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Wounds caused by accidental fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small cutting cautery according to this form that is described:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And it is the conquest of it according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then stop putting that initiative carefully into those fissures until the cautery penetrates to the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth, an abscess is formed and then breaks, and then it bursts, and then it becomes chronic, and the pain increases and a fistula is made, and you treat it and do not deepen your treatment, then stop, so that you ignite the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and place that ignition in the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand inside until the iron ignites at the bottom of it, and afterwards makes a wound or two; and treat it with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore if the wound is abscessed and healed, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cautery of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loose, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide, then stop, place the head of the patient in the tieu seat, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come, thus you stop the gum on the tooth and insert it into the ignited cautery, holding your hand firmly so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be penetrated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery with some wounds according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then let the patient hold his mouth full of salt water and keep it for an hour, and afterwards stop, because the loose tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is stiffened and the corrupting humidity is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or if there is cold or worm in it, or does not confide in the cure with medicine, then cautery is applied in two ways: either cautery with a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in iron culhe, and then take the tip and wrap it around the extremity of the tent, and then immerse it in the boiling horn, and stop it on the painful tooth firmly until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat it several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge the wax or tip in the aforementioned horn, and stop it on the painful tooth, and stop it on that ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the bottom of the conquest of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the emperor prohibits the cautery with fire because you attend to the quantity of iron or of fire, and it is in the heart of some grossness and the acuity of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and stop it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; and do some wounds because the pain will be relieved or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And you should cover the area where the cautery was applied to the patient's mouth with a good bandage and hold it for an hour, and then scrape off the residue; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	You should cauterize as much as you can reach to the extreme parts according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the pipe or tube.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of clubfoot.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When clubfoot is caused by flux and cold humors and does not respond to digestion through medications and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is as follows: having two hubertas of extremities so that the smoke goes from one extremity to the other, and pause that ignition over the aposteme for a while, and another servant indicates that of it, until it reaches the root of the aposteme.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and leave it for three days and pause over the area affected in a good bandage until it is remedied what the fire has burnt.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that limb with ointments and dressings until it is healthy.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the pipe or tube or how to convey the cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of gout of the foot and contraction of the thigh.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is with frigidity of complexion, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medications, and then cauterize from the root of the gout in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not reach the cautery to the gout nor burn the cartilage of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery from the joint of the neck to the posterior spine of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be shaped like a key in the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that limb with what has been previously mentioned until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humidity and the patient has no fever nor tiredness and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected areas of the loins and chest; and another cautery in the middle area of the chest between two nipples; and shape the cautery like a key according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be pointed with the cauteries that are called points, the form of which is previously mentioned in the puncture of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let them be points until they reach those; and then heal that limb with what has been previously mentioned until it is healthy.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery has three levels because cauterization is in that: one time you can do three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of stuttering which is a help for the head.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the stutterer is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not stay in its place at the time of its return, until it is in its usual custom of returning, and then by a small movement it is dislocated thus that it is ended, thus as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be turned over onto their back or left side; and then lift the cartilage which is in the upper part of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated below.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cartilage until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization then with four heads of cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus those subtleties according to the quantity of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cauteries for a while, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a key-shaped cautery or three pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and humidity enter the stomach to the point that it extracts its completeness and is multiplied into it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confide, then it is necessary for the patient to be on their back raised, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger in a key-shaped cautery, and two cauteries below the two sides of the cautery, until the triangular figure of the cautery is obtained; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so they do not make putrefaction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery equals the amount of the two thirds of the thickness of the cartilage.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And this is the shape of the cautery according to this form, and if you wish, make a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the circular form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized at the point where it is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish to hold, and then cauterize it with this cautery at the points; and then cure it with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of the cold fever.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the fever is induced by coldness or humidity or gross ventosity until the normal complete complexion is gotten through excessive egress, and it is cured with the medicine that we have said and not comforted, then it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their bed, and feel with three cauteries according to this form and this measured quantity on the feverish place below the hip, where one perceives the decubitus of home.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And this is the space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and it should be a cautery according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not include your hand in the motion of the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that has been absorbed is equal to the amount of the marrow of the cartilage, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and lifted their legs.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible that you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed too quickly in the cauterization, and it is absorbed the specificity of all the cartilage so that it is absorbed throughout the body and penetrates into the intestines, because the cartilage here is subtle; and you will know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess of the fever with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an ulceration or abscess in the fever and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the fever or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the fever, the patient will be troubled with grave gravity and pain will be acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the fever, then the pain will be greatly acute and many times the doctors are exhausted from curing it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto their bed; and then feel the place of the abscess with your hand; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a rag, in the form of which has been described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until all the cartilage is burned away, until it reaches the siphac, until it makes a sane scar.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not fitting that from this form of cautery use except that which the student in the art of medicine has prolonged, and in the hands of which many maladies are known; more I have experimented on some vague occasions and have been bold about this operation, more I have left those writings to you, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology ulcerate according to this manner of being made, and it is this that you take from the roots of aristology a long dry root which is found, and it should be of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and expose it to fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at the place where it is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and there are two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and there are two cauteries in what is declining between the fifth rib and the nipple, declining slightly towards the back parts; and there is another cautery at the middle place of the foot, and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the back parts; and there is a cautery at the place where it is between the two shoulders, and there are two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not fitting that you include your hand in the cautery, but rather it should be in the manifestation of the cartilage in operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And thus I have described the ancient ways that are ancient among men who use iron-like cauteries resembling a ray and ignite them, and place them at the place where it is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and make a sane scar, just as we have said in the abscess of the fever.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation, do not use pointed cautery, because too much humor accumulates in the location of the fistula, which is not healthy.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the thigh.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the thigh ailment in the way we have discussed about treatment in division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize in three manners, all of which are direct, one of which is to make three or four lines according to the length of the thigh, following the shape of the cauteries of the foot, whose shape has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cautery the width of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the manner which we have mentioned in the cauteries of the foot, similarly.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not comprehend your hand at the cautery; and the patient should be seated on a stool with two legs.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another manner of cauterizing, that is to ignite the cautery having two vertiments, which causes we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and it raises the codeine which is at the end of the thigh where the patient feels the pain on the affected side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be the one that raises the codeine according to the length of the body, so that you make pointed cauteries according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two vertiments, ignite motion, in that entry where they penetrate the codeine of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus make four pointed cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vertiments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you will cure the cautery better than having to grasp or bend for three days, because it is more comfortable than the other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not made in dropsy, but rather in a specific location properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy, in the manners of treatment which we have mentioned in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the foot, and another cautery on the thigh, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the specificity of the codeine.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that you hold or bend for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment then with the cautery as it is necessary for them to be added to the two intentions, and it will be fastened to the doctor's healthy aid.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery that is cauterizing the belly is club-shaped according to the shape of that which precedes, and it is that which is cauterizing the back and is olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostematized in dropsy and are full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot at night, where it is between the auricular and anular, and raise your hand on the cautery and do not twist it; and then raise your hand, and do not return it entirely, because the stagnant water recedes.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cauteries are according to this form: And then make pointed ones on the two thighs, and in each thigh a pointed cautery at the extremity of the cutting cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cauteries are according to the length of the thigh: one on the denolh and another on the middle place of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And then leave the open plague for a long time, so that some water recedes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure them with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of the belly and abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly and abdomen are cold and humid inside so that they debilitate the vertebrae, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with those manners of treatment and do not confuse, and sometimes the patient suffers from exhibiting vertebrae cauteries, then cauterize them with a large cautery on the navel according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four cauteries in the subtle circuit of the navel, with a subtle club-shaped cautery; and with a cautery on the alcatin above the great aloes, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humidity exhibits and the patient tolerates, then cauterize them on the pentenilh and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, because it is a perfect cure of youthful vigor, from which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that corrupts or humidities corrupted, and are cured with what has been said in the division and does not conform to the proper cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus below the spine of the small back, and with a cautery above the umbilical region for two digits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that their stomach is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face is often apostemated, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cautery according to what has been prescribed; and with a cautery on the side, and another cautery on the navel of theirs with a clave-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then cure them from the inside so that they may be healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of athelia, proper for their abscesses.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you abscess athelia, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled in a row.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited cautery into the abscessed athelia, and ultimately apply it inward so that you bring the cautery to the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make a vein or two, because if the achieyl are too many, then cauterize some of them according to what has been recounted, and then cure those who have veins that conform to their own joints so that they may be healthy.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alcoves, it is more durable in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature of their own parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when you have a fistula in the old nature, and it is antiquated, corroding their health and humidities corrupted, and so that which is more worthy than the one that covers is that which proceeds with a subtle tension, and then conveys the quantity of the profundity of theirs before the aforementioned tension.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a row.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you introduce the tension.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that cautery inward so that they burn those corrupted bodies all together one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place inward so that it may be healthy.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and you have abscessed from them the materials, and remained thus for a long time, then you will know that it has been fully cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not abscessed from them, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the region of their corrupted bone, or thus because of those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the kidneys.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or gross ventosity, and thus the coil of the patient's thigh is weakened, then it is fitting that you cauterize above the kidneys with a clave-shaped cautery on each kidney, from which proceeds the remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strengthen their cauterization in the second little behind, so that three linear cauteries will come, and then they will be more durable in youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to cold and humidities, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that in the part below about the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with a cautery on the right part, and another on the left side of theirs.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery is according to the quantity of notes on the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the part below the lower back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And it is a clave-shaped cautery according to what has been proceeded.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the matrix (womb).
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come to the matrix (womb), and thus it is prohibited from conception, and their menses are corrupted, and the provocation of theirs is delayed, and there is pain because of the havement of theirs, then it is fitting that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the umbilical region, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a clave-shaped cautery above the place below the back, or with two cauteries.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates and is retained in the ankle joint, and it causes inflammation of the surrounding tissue, and it seems that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is palpated in the said boy's thigh.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the patient's ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you have sensed that it is tense in the circuit of the joint, and thus it revolves, and so that the joint falls into its proper place within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And this is the cautery which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize with three olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire body; and then take care that it be healed within.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said and not contradicted, and what is ancient, then you should remove the patient from gross humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that it cauterizes the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so at a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery is the quantity of the thickness of the said joint, and so the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some withered veins are the cauteries on the same place on the head of the ankle, because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle in which the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and that the circle contains and burns the inspection of the entire body.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in every case when pain is adhering to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain turns, and with one cautery on the hip for four days, a little below the affected part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutting, and its depth is according to the quantity of the inspection of the body.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient turns where the pain is extended into the place close to the feet, then cauterize there where it turns with three points or four or even more if it is necessary for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient turns with pain being below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize there with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not exceed with the cautery so much that it burns nerves or major arteries, and that for this reason you are above the patient's evil or contradiction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one or another of those who cauterize on the hip and ultimately in the cauterization, and the inflamed flesh swells into the tumor that reaches the foot, and it is perforated and corrupted throughout the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then a strong solution of wine, and then this leads to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of ankle joints, which is this manner: make a circle of iron wire whose circumference is the size of one palm; and it should be from seven or eight inches, according to the thickness of one finger's bone or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And divide that circle into another third; and the space between them is the quantity of the thumb's nail; and these circles are divided into two parts; and their length is one or two inches, and make in that margin of iron decently appareled in the circles; and this is their form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then ignite it in the fire until it is red-hot and emits sparks, and then place it on the ankle joint, the patient collects themselves on the side of the bed.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize with three red-hot cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster with bandages and leave the ulcerated wound for many days; and then take care of it until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Says Albucassis: Oh, my sons, of this species of cautery few have used for the terror of the regard of it, and for that reason few have found those who regard it above all.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of the cauteries are applied to him who suffers from it, and apply them again in that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More cauteries are medicines that adhere, which you make two circles having a perforated armula in which the iron rod of the door of iron is inserted; it is the length of the partition in the narrowness of their shoes or those nails.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each of them according to the quantity of the thickness of the digit; and thus you open below and above, and thus they contain themselves among their following this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then pause on the partition of the water the patient is sitting on, and comprehend your hand on the partition of the water; and take heated water and put it between two circles, and the quality of that should be at a small fire, little by little, and hold that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the moderate heat and the adjustment of it — because that adjusts the moderate heat thus from fire — until the heat ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and evacuate the heated water from all of the water into warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave that for three days and pause on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remainder is seen, and leave that for some days, and correct the purification of it; this is the last step in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure him who is wounded until he is healthy.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make a statue of him containing water according to what is done in the water immersion.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of heated water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and cause not extinct of two names in one partition, and crush them and pause in a new vessel of which the partition below is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the liquid.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause below the bottom of another vessel, and pour over that alkali and cause living water which covers those for one digit, and since you comprehend those with your tie-fastened hand for good compression, and leave the hole that separates from the liquid water in the partition below to the other vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and other renovated alkali, because at that time it will be of great fortitude, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cautery of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus of the medicines some are those which are cautered often, thus you will find and mix and blend and cause to know in that way so that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure in which he was cured of water pain and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healthy for a season thus as recommended, because strong is the one who enters into bath and exercises already of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that he takes some green certarragi, and if there is no green certarragi found, take a fresh fig; and much is crushed into a few gray ones and paused on the water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and bind.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be for a duration of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in bath and when his body is warmed, insert him into the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healthy.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it does not cover that some use of cauteries is in these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	More, Escorides says that when an opening of goat's vein is cautered, it benefits him; and the cautery is in this manner: take wool and dip it in old oil, and pause it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's opening and inflame that in fire until it is made charcoal; and then pause it over the wool and leave it until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then iterate that, and do not cease doing that until the sentiment of the moderate heat penetrates into the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goat's horns.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cautery of pain of toes.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some days' pain is in the toes for many causes, such as for bruising or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, through infusion of cold and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauteries are not made except in this sole species which is done by effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it covers, then evacuate the patient with pills fitted and similar to theirs, which are made on the toes where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of it, because you have ten in each line or cauteries or more, according to the quantity that one sees of the tolerance of the patient and of its virtue.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries or with a medium-sized clave in the middle, following this form.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	About cautery at the commencement of gibosity.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Soft words are given to this sickness in little children; and the sign of its commencement in children is that they stumble upon their structure in the wings and elevate with difficulty and limited movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And the vertebrae in the back of the spine begin to rise above the others, on top of the dorsal and lumbar vertebrae that have already started to overlie.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And thus when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize with a circle-shaped cautery following this form.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which takes the cautery all over the entire affected part of the spine in a circular motion.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the circle of the spine with a pointed cautery of two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And place the points properly among them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the area within, so that it will be healthy with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered in gibosity that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	About cautery for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus how gout caused by cold is cured in many ways of cure and the pains are not relieved, then relief comes from cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you should cauterize with evacuation around the circle of the joint of the foot with several cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this cautery is olive-shaped, of which this is its form.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains go inside the teeth or to other joints, and this many words are given to you, then cauterize that on each tooth with three or four cauteries of the entire affected part with that olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed, which these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, it is only just around the specific area of the codena.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains go inside the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the jaws, and it is called sagra, then prick around the circle of the gums thus as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick around the circle of the gums on each knot and on the pincer of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains go near the joints to the veins or to the muscles, then cauterize the affected parts of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the sickness with good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and evacuation is done with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	About cautery for fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the limbs and the intestines are dislocated from their cavity, and it begins to cure itself, then you should command the sickness to leave its nourishment on the seventh day and use lenient causes so that the wound will heal on the seventh day.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the sickness between your hands over the seventh two, and command it to hold the seventh wing inside so that it will be strong or appear with its cavity or intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the ties of the fingers and sew up the rupture over the bone of the fifth finger, signifying the extremity of which it is similar to the circle of the subordinate parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is its form.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it will be very red and have many sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestine will not come out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then stop the cautery on that sign with your hand as a straight cautery, and you will see that the bones of the fifth finger are aligned inside the middle of the two; and if it does not work in the first instance, try again in another way until you reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during your cautery, that you do not burn the intestine so that on the patient no death or other great evil comes.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	You should know that when you hold the cautery, do not touch the bone, nor confuse your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be careful that the cautery for children is subtle according to their age and measure of theirs.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with a warm poultice until the scar is reduced by the heat.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat those who have other afflictions until they are healthy.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient sit on a soft couch for forty days until the area is sealed and the plague.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And be careful that you pause the nourishment of it according to the length of time of its cure, which lines up with the belly of it, and that the intestine does not come out during the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when one wants to get up after forty days, then administer gentle and decent food, and hold that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be mindful of toil and replenishment of food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of healing, they will surely be healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you will direct the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you want that they do not burst, then cauterize the rupture of that which is being cauterized abundantly according to its quantity, and it is that which is exhaling from the codena as well as the third part of it; and then treat that which we have said, and it will be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And you will find some primary rupture that is cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is signified by a tender point.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a paused line that goes for the width in the flesh because it surrounds the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a keyed cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Hernia.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When an injury occurs in some members by fall or by percussion pain and it persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then be careful to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And it is the cautery of each member according to its size and smallness, and its strength and development, and location of hernia and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if it is not healthy from the first cautery, well; and if not, then iterate over it with the cautery; because of the custom of those pains it is that they are punctured in a member next to that member which approaches you, so that you be careful to conserve those with the cautery until the patient is healthy.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The leprous ulcers are treated with a cautery for great improvement, and magnificently if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and as that cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor this, and fear about the patient that the corruption comprehends the whole body of it and its entire complexity, then cauterize that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and another on the forehead to the end of the hairs; and two above the horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand with the cautery a little inside so that you press on the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs are dislocated, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the molars according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then be careful to cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two molars, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on the loins, and one on each loin, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the soft foot; and cauterize that on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each talon of the soles of the feet, and on the foscils of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves that are above the ankle that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some ulcers are cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the thigh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more it improves and the more it confers; and you should know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, as they have said, so that the body of it is already stupefied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It seems that this sentence means:
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the cautery in the fire of burning coals, mixing well and making another healing within so that it is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	About the cauterization of numbness or stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and it is not healed, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the greatness of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the inspection of the cord in a little while.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that one who is wounded, until it is healthy.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some wounded people are cauterized for certain numbness which goes to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back and eyes, and it is the movement of the nerves which makes that member, and the numbness is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume upon it except for one who is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the whole moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	About the cauterization of ulcers that are gangrenous.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not respond to the usual remedies of medicine, then you cauterize over that ulcer with a pointed cautery for a little while according to the quantity of the specific cord until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that ulcer with the fire of coals and of lentils, with rose oil and with leaves of dragon's blood, and with dove's blood or pigeon's blood, each one a part and all are mixed together, and then let it be anointed with a cloth and placed over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	About the cauterization of cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize that part with a circular cautery around the circumference of it, so that it is completely removed.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And I advise the wise ones that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it has not been seen, because I fear that it is ulcerated, and you have already seen some wounded people.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to return to the previous method of cauterizing in a circle around it, as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	About the cauterization of indurations.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some indurations are delayed in maturity, and thus it is because of the superfluous fat that makes them, or because of the state of the patient, which is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturity of indurations; then cauterize around the circumference with many small pointed cauteries; and afterwards let it be, for it will fasten in maturity.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and place it in the middle of the induration until it penetrates the cord.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you make the cautery in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm is alleviated; and then heal it until it is healthy.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	About the cauterization of corroding ulcers.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corroding ulcers are corrupting wounds in the member, which corrode as if a focus of dry gangrene is eating away.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if you want to cauterize that corroding ulcer in the place where it suffers from a focus, then you ignite cauteries with many small nails, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where it is corroding.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that entire part until you eradicate all the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it be for three days, and apply over the cauterized places a triple ointment mixed together until all scars are totally eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then heal that wounded flesh generating new flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which remains corrupt in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corroding ulcers are treated with some old remedies of acute medicine, because that is half in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But the emperor's cautery is of worse reputation, and it is to be used with more judgment.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already said the cure of the member with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when the hours of urgency come.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	About the cauterization of wounds and of other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many wounded people go to the lower parts of the foot with maladies which are called wounds, and it is a gross, inward cause, which takes away the foot; and cauteries are made in those places according to two manners, that is to say, with fire and with water heat.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The more cauteries are focused where they ignite like a fiery furnace, the one that is made of iron according to the quantity that it contains in its entirety, and is of subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then stop the ignition on the nail, and return your hand to the cautery in the circle of the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it like that for three days until you start to feel better.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with soothing mallows, saved and crushed in salt, and leave the plaster on for a night, because it will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place affected by generating flesh until it is healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and you have applied poultices on the surface of the body, mainly on the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer to those cauteries in water, and it is that you take a small tube of iron or of fiery furnace, and place it on the nail; and then put your hand in the tube of hot water, and hold it, and you return with compression of your hand all around, and it is inserted into the margin of the tube at the root of the nail, and you extract the hot water through the hole at the root of the toe; and wait for a little while, about an hour, for the bite of the hot water to penetrate, and then remove it, because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do to those ones and then add another until you come upon all the whys of their suffering in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those pustules because the roots of the nails are eradicated, and the flesh will regenerate on its own.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 3.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you have a trembling due to cold in the nerves or fever caused by cold, or another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and a cautery on their chest, and on their stomach, a cautery on the olive-shaped spot.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of it is restored and strengthened by the health of the patient's cold constitution.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 4.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of sudden accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is suddenly afflicted, and there are pustules that are made of gross corrupt materials; therefore it is necessary at the beginning to appear, that it be cauterized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle, the extremity of which is extended into a fiery point; or with a long herbal root; or with a slow-burning cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes applied poultices are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not believed, and it is disrupted, the superfuous excess that makes them, and it heals them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	The emperor commands that this be done with evacuation through bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of fluxes of blood due to accidental injury of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many applied poultices flow from the artery that is injured by the wound which it has in front, or by the beginning of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and therefore it seems difficult to remove that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when it reaches to that point, then you should hold with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop there until the flow of blood is stopped, and it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then stop at the focus of the olive-shaped cauteries, few and great in number, and extract them until they are completely ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those a small or large one according to the place and wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly holding it back so that you may reattach the orifice, and return the cautery until the blood is confined and restrained.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you reattach the orifice and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully prepared from the cauteries which are in the focus, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not touch the nerves which are here, and that another evil comes upon the patient with another malice.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you know that when the arterial flow of blood is strong, then it is not possible to restrain the blood in those, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four methods: either with a cautery as I have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of my veins are burned and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with a strong ligature, or that it be stopped by medicines which have the virtue of restraining the blood; and they are strengthened in the pulvinar with a decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Those who administer restrictive diet to the patient with a wounded limb and a strained joint, or drops by positioning causes combustion and similarity, do not comfort unless it is bitter.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if there is an end to the disease and it does not seem like a doctor's presence or medicine, then work on the treatment of the indicated finger over the orifice of that vein, thus having said, and understand the great constriction within so that the blood flow is obstructed from the superior part of the plague, and above the artery it does not seem to be reopened; and above the artery, it seems to be constricted by a great deal of coldness within so that the blood flow is congealed and thickened; and but you may try if there is need for cautery or necessary medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	It begins with the second treatment.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and of vein sections and of flea-biting and of sores and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the teachings of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have said in the first chapter all about malady in which cautery fire is convenient and burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters according to the subordinated arrangement of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter with that method, so that it may be clarified to whoever wants it, then above what will be demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And therefore I begin here, cove, son, that you learn that in this chapter is to terrify whoever it is from the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that which is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuated catheters are thrown away, which is with blood in which there is life by means of aspiration of the vein or incision over the aposteme or percussion of the exsiture or purification of the plague or extraction of a dart or incision of rock and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those accompany fear and trembling and in the end of their cat [patients] death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you does not fall that which is in the sitting, because some evacuated cases happen to you in the manner of men who have many manners of maladies.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is certain that they will flee from their malady and it is far from them the death, and thus for the vehemence of that which finds its malady, and for the length of the malady of him, and in the malady it is fear for that which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those it is the one that gives to your son to have and to say, you hope for that health, and the following malady is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not think that you consent to that which is seen by you of this manner; and your caution should be greater than what is thought and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause over that unless certain scientific knowledge verifies it for you, and at which point you perceive successful success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And you will be established in the cure of all your maladies by prognosis and indication of him which is converted salvation, because in that it is to you helpers above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires your understanding and does not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinct from chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that it may be clarified to you what you demanded of it and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this malady many times ends in children from birth and when the nurse strengthens the child's head with their livelihood.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some evacuated cases end because of hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this malady except in children; and to all those whom I have seen it has been the sign of death, and thus it is to me a sad and lamentable work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head which was full of water swelled, and the child's head was so magnificent until it ceased to be able to support itself by means of the greatness of its head, and more that the humidity made it increase until it died from heat.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the skull and the bone, or is added beneath the bone above the siphon.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in that case if the humidity is between the skull and the bone and the aposteme is small, then it is known that you find in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches until the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the aposteme is greater, then there are two fissures here in this manner.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If humidity is in the bones, it seems that you have taken the entire top of the head away from the partitions and the water is squeezed out when you comprehend that the tie is tight on the partitions and not squeezing out to your amazement.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	I think you have found three fractures in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract the excess humidity; and then strengthen the fractures with draps and plasters; and then apply something on top for six days, and then remove the bandage and cure the wound with tentacles and unguents, and strengthen the head in equality; eat the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which considers how to appear the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some veins are more in the occiput, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left; and then attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the water is replenished, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid those flowy veins of blood and marrow, lest the patient die from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries which are close to the auricles, called Hilassysses.
Capitol segon.	Chapter three.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When you find some catarrh or rheum in the veins or on the feet, and it is antiquated, and does not confer on that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision on those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then know when you want to incise those that the patient's vein is near the head, and then clean the place with a sharp drap for so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some drap; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the places on each of them above the places which are close to the auricles, and so they are hidden until in some homes.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place a thread above the artery with a tent, and then incise each one in the space of each part of the head, making an incision penetrating into the bone, and it is so for the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, enter the space below the artery and cut through to the incisions at the top parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And it is the length of the incision that measures two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood flows out in pulsating egress, which bursts forth frequently before calming down.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then know that you measure from the auricle the quantity of the space of three digits, and then place a thread with a tent, and make it enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And it is known that one gets rid of the blood flow which is a quantity of six ounces. and it is far from getting more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and of the replenishment of the artery of it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone some cause of the cyanosis, then incise that so that no abscess is formed cautiously.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with plasters and bandages of cloth, and then cure it with unguents until it is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When some ancient or chronic catarrh flows, due to humid aggravations and quality in the veins of the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing, and it is medicated with various methods of medical cure, but it does not confer, then we have proceeded to extract the arteries from the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient's vein is near the skin which is in the temples; and it tends to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the pulse, and it is hidden until in few homes due to the vehemence of the flow.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then clean the place with a sharp drap or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the space of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you score the cord with which this is facilitated until you reach the artery; and then get onto it and extract it from the superior parts until you extract it from the cord and discover it from the tunics which are beneath it, of the entire part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it at the extremity of the ounce, and then incise that one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flux of blood, because if it is not incised, the blood will not flow at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood from the vicinity of the affected area. Enter three drops.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the acidity is great, then it is necessary to lie down in two places with a double strong bandage or with long cords, and do not touch the putrid matter during the consolidation of the wound and ending the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the excess which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone, or with a cutting cautery into which the extremities of it are incised, and stay in place of that same work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work because the patient has fever or is of complex composition; for cautery is among those causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to extract the acidity that fills the place of the old wound, and then pause decently on the dust, and then be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh and bones healthy within so that it may be sanitized.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if meanwhile you work on another occasion to stop the flow of blood from the acidity, then you touch to restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or that fills the place of the wound, and stretch your hand within so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause your finger on the place within so that the blood is congealed, and wet the place with water of vehement coldness within so that the acidity repose, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is more suitable in the extraction of acidity is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, since you have touched the two places with tension, and pause somewhat, not much, within so that they penetrate to the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it may be elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the acidity of the two points is tempered.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Perhaps it is better to temper the acidity with two points, because if you agitate them with two points properly towards each friction, and do not incise the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So since there is some grossness in those, it has held the heat of fire in those and the flesh is more quickly abscessed.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more suitable.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space which is between two points is the quantity of the grossness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the cure of bodies of sharp and acidic humors of the veins.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the veins are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head before falling, and do not find in that any cause of the cure by medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already turns red and feels on the dry front of walking thus as if they were walking with ants, and the veins of that one are so exhausted, humidifying thus that already their skin is worn out, and the eyelids are so scalded by the acidity of the tears, the ancient wise masters in the cure of those of this operation, and I do not remember that cure in space.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to walk with the skin which is on the dry front, and then incise in the front three fissures equally distant according to the length of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third of the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the acidities which are in two sides, and elongate your hand from the continuity of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three digits adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of spongy material prepared or dry cloths that absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the partition of the temples within to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract all that code which is between two incisions with the siphon which is above the bone, and then do it from the incision to the middle within to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then straighten this spatula and insert it into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a cutter, having one part sharp and the other not sharp.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the side of that sharp part towards the adjacent flesh of the code, and the side of it to the bone, and apply it within so that it reaches the middle fissure, and abscesses all those veins that descend from the head to the veins.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It is necessary to continue the incision at that point to make an opening in the hollow of the knee joint, and then make it in the same way into another opening.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Then pour a certain quantity of warm water, expressing the places of the swollen veins of the blood congealed.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And stop in each hot opening of the hip joint, and place on those swollen veins embedded with wine and oil, and take care not to inflame the aposteme with a cauterized instrument.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a great abundance of warm water or decoction, and then take care to anoint with basilicon oil and rose oil, and others, so that the wounds may be healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of ulcers caused by catarrh and those descending from the injured parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute catarrh and it continues, and sometimes the ulcers of the patient's thighs are greatly extended, and already their eyesight is weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and because of this their skin is rough, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you will know by these accidents that the materials and catarrh do not come except from many veins of the injured parts proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: that you order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in a certain opening at the middle of the forehead, a small one for the width (and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right temple; and make it straight into the bone; and stretch out your hand from the tendons of the temples which are numb from the mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth and then replace it between the two lips of the incision with hot hip joint or with dry cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen beneath the swollen veins embedded with wine and oil, so that they do not inflame the post-operative wound with a cauterized instrument.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the aposteme has already diminished, then it is time to scrape the bone until it begins to form new flesh, and then take care to apply a regiment of dry poultices which make the flesh heal, thus as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophonum and mix them together, and make a plaster and apply it to these wounds on the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of those that fall into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral pebbles or a cause similar to pebbles, thus like iron and vein, or it is from a plant thus like cress or fava, or it is a fluxible cause thus like water and wine agree and their similarity, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when pebbles fall into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if times the pebbles, then distill in some oil of violet or sizami, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the storming with a condiment, and open the nostrils for the arrival of the storming.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then stop in the circle of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not evacuated, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtiles, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten in the gestures, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument of subtle touch of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not forgotten by that, then make a canal of silver and insert the extremity of the canal into the tube of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oil softened so that nothing comes out except the canal.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it with the tender vein which has strong attraction, because many evacuated matters have been recounted with water that they had.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alum bat or prepared viper's bugloss which has pressed the wings with a small quantity, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelop it decently paused.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the tube of the ear facilitated, and then dry the ear of humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And then if it is not forgotten in all the causes which we have recounted, then you will take care to remove that from the teeth so that it does not inflame the post-operative wound with a cauterized instrument or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of removing that is that you at the beginning dry the patient's vein of the cephalic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make a circle between your hands and convert the ear to the upper parts, and find a small opening in the root of the ear where the veins of it are previously gathered.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	If the fracture of a lunar figure enters into the knee, and the knee is bruised, or it is necessary to apply an appropriate instrument; and apply it to the fracture at that hour with velocity, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain is in the ear and it's one of the fat that grows and inflates, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own judgment, then take a subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that the absorption of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not think that it is humidified by the vapor of the ear, and stop it with gentle touches, and extract it from those corners or gestures subtly, or by subtle injection, as it has been said, because the extraction of it is alleviated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered into the ear, because the patient uses sternutation to facilitate the commencement, and fills the whole ear with a lot of liquid, and pours it over the ear where the water is, and if by chance it is forgotten, be it; and otherwise, take three or four tender fingers according to the length of the digit, and place them in the focus of a little opening, and the patient inserts one of those into the channel of their ear and sounds above one finger of that party and percussionates with another finger on the finger which is behind the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then stop pouring water into the ear until all the water has been forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is forgotten, then you take pieces of paper or of cotton. and place one extreme end of it in the ear and extend the other extreme end into the focus until it is combined with the mucus of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And also place another cotton and make so many turns until all the water is forgotten, and draw it out with a canal just as it has been said about the extraordinary ear.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beast entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, then push and pull it out similarly, cure it just as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes apparition at the time of vehement movement, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and corners, and the cause of it is purer than all other causes that happen in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if some cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle corners, but if no cause appears, then take a straight and narrow canal and draw out the abundance of which this is the form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can bear; and apply suction with water for strong sucking, and make many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey your own judgment, then operate and close the circuit of the canal with wax just as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and find it in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be the one in which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, straight, in which there is a small hole, and placed thus.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it is how they fill the cavity of the canal, where it will be necessary to continue here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the radish and wrap it decently in the extremity of the canal, and apply a gentle oil in the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines in the canal — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the radish with gentle pressure and express your hand so that the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what has been poured into the ear should be warmed in a little focus.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you distilled into the ear is not too frequent, because ear medicines do not bear that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure of Opilation of Ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some turns of certain enfantized yeast, which are not perforated, and that has already accumulated in some homes, opilation occurs in the middle of the ear due to plague or carnation in that; and this opilation is made in the prison of the ear's channel, which does not consent to vehement movement, and some turns are in the parts beforehand.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the chest of the patient, which does not comprehend the vein's movement, is in the major dispositions of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which follows the vein's movement, it is necessary that you hold the patient's ear to the sun and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if the apparent oppression sometimes occurs, observe that subtle spatium of which this is the shape of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it is in which small width, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatium is of two lion's widths so that it does not touch the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And then if the oppression is due to a birthmark on the ear or in the marrow of it, then you have subtly and vehemently facilitated an entrance so that the entire flesh is restored.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the oppression is in the chest of the ear, then take a subtle lion's root and scrape that focus into a little hole, and then place it in the marrow of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And then if you have felt oppression in that which the patient has facilitated, due to the gravity of ascent, it forces the oppression of it to be facilitated; and beware that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then pause in the ear drip by drop according to the quantity of the width of the channel which you have enveloped in the Egyptian ointment; and do that for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a jug and pulverize over the affected area and use it; and if the ear is already apostemed, then it is necessary that you extract the water and permute it with another water which you will envelop in wax so that it is made with oily roasting, until it is the aposteme cured; and then cure it until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Maybe it occurs a flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and pause over the ear, and use another cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the cure of athelia, which falls upon the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athelia which falls upon the eyelids of the eyes, some of which are humid, some of which are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then it is necessary that you hold those with tenacious or pointed nails, and anoint those with the essence of their roots, and then pause over the affected areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Maybe if pain with a flow of blood comes, then you cauterize those with a subtle, linear cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to return the incisions and dry wounds when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized in focus, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure of cataracts that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Moist humors collect in the eyelids of the eyes for some cause which is assembled with grandeur in its strength and hardness, and thus grandeur is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of gross humidity in the upper and lower eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation in them is that you consider then if the grandeur proceeds from it in that which appears from the eyelid and is magnified to the entire part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make a fissure about that with width, and then scrape it from the entire part to facilitate until it evaporates, and then suspend it in a pointed instrument and separate it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Maybe if you have not prepared the incision of it, then you cannot penetrate the eyelid with a small incision little by little, then that does not appear in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not overcome evil by that which the angle of it restores and incarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the grandeur is declining to the inner parts of the eyelid from the inner surface, then you evacuate the eyelid and suspend the grandeur in a pointed instrument, unless you indicate an incision, and press it from the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is prolonged, that does not appear in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then make an incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure the area with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the cure of abscesses in the lower eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Abscesses are gray things which are engendered in the tunics of the lower eyelid, and they increase among infants, aggravate the eyes of those who have them, and cloud their clarity so that they cannot gaze at the brightness of the sun because the lachrymal glands become stuck to them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And thus you often find them gazing at their faces for a long time, and at their faces while sleeping; and so on the lower eyelids of their eyes the humid eyebrows, which have already covered inflammation, and the imminence of apparent abscesses is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel abscesses until they are apparent.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	In some manual of operation it is necessary that the patient pause with his head in a certain position, and then place a cloth of linen or of a hot circle according to the quantity which contains the entire affected part, and then place that over that and press with fingers of the entire periphery so that an arc shape is formed in the middle of the circle, and then feel in the middle of that humidity accumulated incidentally in the fissure for the width, and the fissure should not be larger than the fissure which is made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Maybe in the preceding cavity you will find the entire code within which you reach to form an arc, because among the major deposits processes an arc for the fissure according to the shape of white crust.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that humor which you have enveloped between the fingers and toes of the affected parts beforehand and revolve between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that the humidity does not reach the vein and descends to that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	Maybe if the arc does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, maybe you adjust in the fissure a small facilitated humor until it processes an arc; and then extract that thus as we have said; and then submerge cloths of linen in water and wine and place them over the area and strengthen those humid powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus you will find that you draw out salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if you find a post-apostemic abscess, then cure that with emplasters of Cedar oil until it is healthy.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the manner of touching the vein.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the veins there are natural and ancient adjustments, then those nose towards the vein and make various kinds of evils, such as assiduous tears and mollification of the eyelids and skin until it is cause of destruction of the vein which is called touching of the vein, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched through incision and suture; or with canes as you will be directed.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then it is necessary that you place the head of the patient in a certain position; then convert the eyelid of the vein with your left hand, and if it is converted, well; and otherwise, insert a needle in that where there is faith of the affected part beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with faith from below, and it will be — near the margin of the eyelid where the veins are — near the veins, and pull the faith to the upper parts towards the eyelid, and convert that into a ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then feel in the affected part within the eyelid beneath the adjusted veins with incident humidity of the major lachrymal into the minor lachrymal; and then extract the faith and place beneath the eyelid powdered powders of cotton or linen, and then apply a thread over the eyelid in a tent-like shape, and it will be thus like the figure of a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Maybe in this way it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because then it has been diversified among men, because of those it is necessary that a great quantity be incidentally placed on the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then feel with the humidity over the two lines which have been signaled, and begin from the major lachrymal into the minor lachrymal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near the natural veins thus as it is the grossest part of the vein.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onguent in one of the two angles of the code, and then excavate that entire thing, and then adjust with the scissor the two labia on the gut or faith of subtle wool, and absorb the blood, and make adhere what superfluously falls from the faiths over two sponges for some envisioning causes, if you want to do it, and otherwise, don't cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the suture of the faiths for three days or four, and then cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the plague with its suture, and cure that with what dries and constrains, because the eyelid is elevated from the sigillation of the plague and the aggregation of it; maybe the suture is better. Therefore, I have thusly discussed the antiquities of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Maybe in this way it is solicited over the patient, and it is a good operation, and it is not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it is another manner in taxmir, and it is that you signal over the eyelid figure thus as a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and congregated inches according to this form.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Maybe if it is not possible to have the inches, and it is not engualhed, then take a needle in which there is faith and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other faith near the major lachrymal, and the faith according to the minor lachrymal, and adjust between the fingers the faiths in equality, and then elevate your hand with elevation engualhed, elevate the entire code over which it is signaled thus as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and take care that the inside is healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	Perhaps you will hasten the ripening of your abscess or your fracture, but that abscess is at the cervix and it appears similar, and it is ulcerating.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some evacuated humors descend to the eyelid which are converted into healthy skin, therefore it is good that you use those in that of the abscess we have spoken of; maybe suture in certain cases is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	You will prepare the remedies according to this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and dissect the figure that is hidden according to what has been recounted; and then prepare two canals or two subtle asters of which the length will be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs will be less than the width of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have incised in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add certain subtleties under what superfluously flows from the eyelid of the wheel, and construct the canals of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and lay it aside for some days, because the codena (codex?) for the morbid structure will be denied and it will be rejected until you place it in its proper seat.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps it is delayed, then cut through the three veins, and then take care of the wound until it is healthy.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Since it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it has the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of pricking skin on the wheel when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough, and pricks the wheels, then the operation on it is that you take subtle agula and pauses in that subtle vein of cedar and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move subtly in many ways.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And it is the length of the veins of a quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you will compose another subtle vein below it in brief, and join the extremities of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then stop the evil that is in the tieu, and it will be proper of the sun for your work to be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has needed to be engendered, and make it penetrate into the eyelid firmly until you extract it from under the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin underneath and introduce it into the alloy, and they will be one or two or three skins, and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand into that until the skin is forged-alloyed in the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Perhaps it is not alloyed and the skin is not yet joined, you will alloy to the divided parts below in the vein which you have composed there, until it is fully alloyed above the traumatic wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you will see it in the vision of the wheel, because then you will alloy and the vein, and you will grasp something and close the wheel, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its own place and is born upon that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is more brief, then you adjust a long skin of natural skins, and it is elevated in that, or until it is lengthened properly into another space, and then you elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the cure of extracting what is seen in the eyelid underneath.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it is in the wheel extracting, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is constricted in its own, or in the right or left divided part, for bad consolidation of wounds or sections or cauteries, and it is called leporina, and this extraction is natural or accidental, and it is done for consolidation of wounds or sections or cauteries, or for resemblance to their malcurations.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	There the manner of the operation on it is that you perform that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause in it where it is between those a certain amount of dryness of air, and bind them together until they are healthy.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not think that you will use the cure of it from the causes which dry it out, constraining; because if you do that, it returns to extracting worse than never having had it.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which mollify thus as it is fenugrec, and embrocate with water in which are cooked altaea and semen of air, or inject dyaquilon, which liquefies in some of the oils, and submerge in that measure, and take care of that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you will perform it in all ingenium that is not consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And in this operation which we have described, it is not but some kind of correction of the dislocation that does not return to the normal shape of the affected area according to the focus of the pain.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation which is caused in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This dislocation which is caused in the eyelid below, which is commonly called a "fallen eyelid"; and it is either some natural one, or another accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental ones are caused by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operating on it is that you take a needle and make a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates both extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and pull it towards the needle, and insert it into the spatium in a wide amplitude.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And thus the shape of the eyelid returns according to its natural form; but if not, take the thread and pass it through the divided figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make two sutures on the edge of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the extremities of the two sutures form two angles of the incision, which have been made so that they converge, and they are from their made angle so that when they come together they form a figure of theirs.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh for the quantity that is the width of the lower eyelid below it, so that you lift the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then treat them with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices, until they are healthy.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the dislocation is due to a fracture or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat suture over the skin of the eyelid according to what has been previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between the two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of dislocation when it is above or below, which runs through the operation, according to the form of dislocation that has been prepared, and this is in various diverse forms.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsmen prepare everything in advance in whatever manner is possible to return the figure to its natural form, or near to it, and that malady according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is solidly stuck above on the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural functions, therefore it is necessary that you introduce the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it towards the nail.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion into a subtle spatium, which is not sharp from the incisions, having obtained an obtuse angle so that the malady is not disturbed by the operation, and remain with the spatium that does not touch the eye in its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And thus your incision should be such that it removes that adhesion with facility, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the eye salt water in which you wash; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of milk, and place on the eye a flax seed infused in the white of an egg, and then use for three days causes that consolidate until it is healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of a nail and prominence of flesh of the lacrimal glands.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that a nail is according to two manners, because it is either nervous, and resembles a thin, subtle ciphac; or it is non-nervous, resembling a white, congealed humidity, which when touched with the finger, or is forced to take on the nail, is separated and the nail does not stay in place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin except from the major lacrimal gland until it goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of operating in the incision of it is that the malady places its own head in the tieu seat, and then operates on the eyes of it, and lifts the eyelid with its hand, and then collects the nail in the place of little duplicated extension and stretches it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and introduce it into a horse's hair or ox's or cow's, or similar things, or strong wire, or duplicate the extremity of the small needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it to the nail; and stretch it to the upper parts, and remove from the hair the width of the nail which is seen in the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you should follow that medicine into the patient's back towards the nape of their neck.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you should insert the remedy into the root of the lacrimal duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and lift the natural flesh of the lacrimal duct so that by inserting it no continuous flow of tears is hindered.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or has a fissure, thus we have said, and then it should be excavated with a lion's spatula, which is the shape of it.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that you do not touch the corneal tunic with the spatula and that it does not cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then insert the gutta into the wound a little salt powder or of clear serum, and let it be inside for another day; and then take care that the water that covers the wound is sanctified.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that joint, then many weakened specimens of this type of nail are cured with medicines, and they are healed thus, as I have written and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to insert it, then open the wound of the patient and take a subtle lion's spatula of sharp edge, according to this form.
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rarefied and congealed and enters into the root, then distill from your work in the wound of clear serum or of clear blood or of salt powder, and apply the wound for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over that operation until everything that is of it is removed, so that the contrary abscess does not remain in the wound, because then you will leave that, and take care at the beginning to remove the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate your operation on that root until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noted in the wound for great annoyance, should be suspended with an onion; and insert that into a partition, and do not finally insert it so that no continuous flow of tears is hindered.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill into the lacrimal clear blood and clear serum until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the insertion of almond-like remedies and of what is born from adjusted flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some weakened specimens in the wounds of some people are born from raw flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the parts before and is assembled like a rose of balconet.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on it is that the patient holds their head in the bandage; and then open the wounds of that and collect all that flesh with convenient onions, and you have a forceps or a chest; and then insert the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wound that does not deviate from your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And it is your insertion into which you insert those or with the spatula that we have recommended in the insertion of the nail, or small forceps which are collected according to what will be seen later in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When your insertion is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wound with salt powder, or distill into the red powder and apply it to the wounds of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound before, covered with a dressing of egg whites until it is assured against abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if some cause of almond-like remedies is sinewed with holy abscess, and fears abscess, then leave the wound and take care of that abscess in what cedes that abscess, and then iterate over that operation until it is healed, and similarly make a just-adjusted flesh that accides in the wound of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you should cover that everything is totally cured of the wound freely by natural way or by accidental way, opening with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is sufficiently suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of sabur in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sabur comes with red veins which are tested over the wound and prohibit its healing, and they develop the wound in length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Then it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is sabur is strong and in it there is no other malady except sabur, then you collect that sabur.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to hold their head in the bandage, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle duplication according to this form.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onions gradually in a container according to this form.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and abstain from the holy hour to hour, until you see that those veins are removed from the wound and are turned around.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Be careful that you do not let the vein at the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is during the morning, before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed it, then distill in the chief vein either green or red for that which is corroded, so that it removes the rust from the saber.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Maybe it is not possible to collect everything at that hour, and then apply a poultice to all that which ceases the pain of it, and let it be for some days until the pain of it is appeased and assuredly protected from postrema caution.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over it according to the method that masters the manual therapy until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the fractures:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of aristotelian nasal polyps.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat aristotelian nasal polyps with cautery or acute burning medicine, according to the narration that precedes it and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in it except that you focus on the postrema of the disease, and extract all the humidity which is in it until the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is discovered and sometimes it is in corruption or blackness, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named a rough head, and it is made of iron indeed, and it is the redon head thus as one makes the which is pointed for pointing with lime or alkali for subtle pointing (thus as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And pause that over the corrupted bone location, and then revolve it among the fingers of the diseased, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then some evacuations are made, and then restore the location with causes of desiccative and styptic remedies.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh born and the body is absolved from the sane and Roman routine for 40 days, and it is not renewed and not apostemated and does not happen in the accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And thus, then it is not in the engendering except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this method: that you discover from second bone or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take trio according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	It is the extraction of the triangular iron, and the foundation of it is primarily extended to the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then pause that over the bone, and it is that of the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the vein, and then revolve your hand with the trio until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient for as long as it arrives to be well, so that you know when your hand is well.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the location with styptic and desiccative medicines, thus as you have experienced it.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then since the flesh and location are indurated, then the matter which was poured out to the parts before returns to the nose, so that is why it is easier to relieve the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the vein.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the vein emerges in its entirety and does not occur with nocturnal movement or diminution, then it is necessary to lax the patient, and then follow, and then pause on the cervical scarifications and suck for good suction; and then pause over the vein with a liniment made of acatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the poultice over the vein with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take drapes of the many lions' powder, and each drape is duplicated in four places; and make it from those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the vein has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with a hard, strict structure; and iterate the suction cups on the scarifications; and then remove the suction cups and let the vein be straightened during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Maybe sometimes the ligament is mollified, then it is necessary to make it very straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament during the day and night thus as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the vein is not reduced, well, and thus, then iterate the poultice with powders and structure and suction cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the tunicate vein.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you make a disruption in the tunicate vein, and then it is prominent and proceeds outward through the eyelids thus as a grain of radish, and its form is ornamented for that, and you want to incise, then the operation on it is thus as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the vein of the lower part below in the upper part, and then put the other needle in which is double fil from the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and let the first needle follow according to its disposition; and then incise the location of the double filet and lift it from that part of the vein in the circle of the needle, and strengthen that much.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the thorn and place it on the swollen vein filled with humor, and let the flow of blood come out through the opened passage.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal the vein in that which comforts the inside so that the wound may be healthy.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some evacuated veins of the entire affected area around the circle of the thickened vein, and then are perforated in the subtle spatium that comes to the head of the vein, and correct the albuginean humidity, and descend the vein and enter as soon as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called ulcer does not exist, but rather it is a sane vein similar to descending water and not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to operate on it is to make the ulcer sit above the prepared seat and straighten, and then take the dry head in your hands more than two parts and mau that inside so you see the sane vein pervading to the lower parts, and then it becomes dry and does not descend, and remains stuck in the light, and the ulcer sees the causes thus as it was.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent to the vein is not prepared as we have said, then make the ulcer sit between your hands and take a subtle spatium and spin it over the panniculus surrounding a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva in the corneal tunics (in the place you see), so that the vein may be forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is forgotten, then you distill the vein of hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugrec and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be healed for the other causes so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending water from the vein.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have said the species of water in the division and which ones are convenient to perforate in the declared sermon, then that second according to sanity.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is necessary that you make the ulcer sit between your hands on a chair and bind the vein tightly with a strong knot.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then pause near the eyelid of your vein, your left hand if the vein is on the left; or your right hand, if the vein is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take with your right hand the blade, if the vein is on the left; or with your left hand, if the vein is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then pause the extremity of the blade near the crown for the greatness of the radius in the vein's album on the part of the tear lake, and then insert the blade in the vertex and turn your hand in that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the vein's album and feel that the blade has already reached the desired cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measurement of the path of the blade at the point of the space which is from the pupil into the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the vein; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the vein through the clarity of the corneal tunics.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then pause the blade into the place where the water is, and then you will attract it below a evacuated vein, and so if the water descends soon, then you will see the ulcer that has been treated above the vein, and the blade in your vein.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little while; so if the water has descended, then you will stop that other vein before the blade is touched.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And so when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the blade with ease, and turn your hand a little at a time, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and in that lava the vein deduces; and then pause outside the vein or stop or anoint with oil of rose and album of humor and ligature around the vein itself.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we, those who are of our time, pause over that which is written in the album of humor.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your blade to the instrument of the vein for its durability — because it is a virtue of the men whose vein is very hard —, then it is necessary that you take the spatium which is called albared, of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then perforate in that conjuncture, and do not exceed your hand in the trajectory, and it is not so that you make a way to the blade in a subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the blade according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And receive the complement of your work, be prepared for the ulcer to sleep descendingly made on which it sleeps above the two veins in a dark maison, and be prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature is aligned, and do not move the vein's head to the right or left part of anything.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	It should be treated according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then expose that in the dark room and clear the free view, and make the veins appear for some causes, and then return the treatment within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover that you make in the hour of the cures or almost then return to the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having covered that you remove it for thus the water pushes gently but greatly and vehemently in regard to the regimen.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Perhaps it happens that an abscess bursts, then cover that you extract the vein from the seventh day, and correct that which remains of the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you absolve the sight of it and pause on the oral face for which the regulation of its evacuation is done through some days, it exists in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it will be extracted from that dark room gradually and converted into its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in the chapter it is not excused to omit certain visions, and then you will be ardent about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now it has arrived at our knowledge of certain things which are according to the Art, and it is said that they make fire in the Ayroc magma perforated where the water succeeds.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Perhaps Emperor, you have not seen anything like this in our land which has perfected it, nor is it written in the books of the ancient authors; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magma for which it is above those, that which ignores those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or of their own proper material, and they are the extremities of their arm in this subtle triangular shape, the acute extremity thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born diverse adjusted flesh growths from which some cause is assembled to scorpion-like motions of many feet, or to a polyp foot; and this illness is called polyp because it has a resemblance to that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of it is that it is not lion's flesh of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is among these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover that you make the evil exit between your hands and place it in the sun, and warm the nostrils of it, and prick the tender part of those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the previous parts, and then inscribe what you have comprehended of those I have spat out subtly from one part within which you know that all flesh is already ostensible; because if it remains of any cause from which the abscession is possible, then you will return to the one of the subtle instruments facilitated within which none of the causes remain.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Perhaps it happens that the abscess bursts, then you pause at what covers; or it is of the malignant apostemes, then you touch and cauterize that within which it is abscessed sane and all the cavities are opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then it will be cut in the nose, then the incision will agree with water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Perhaps the nose is open and of its processes humidity enters into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Perhaps the humidity does not penetrate as it covers, then you know that it is flesh born in the purulent ulcers of the nostrils which have not reached abscession.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore then cover that you insert a thread of the same quality, and sew in the foot joints, and pause between each joint the quantity of the digit or month, and engineer the evil and insert one extremity of the thread into the nostrils with the radius or another cause which is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then it will be done, that the thread of the ornament enters into the channels of the nostrils, and it is established on the thread of the galleon, because many visions seem similar to this action, and it is a gentle cause for him who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that is above the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer serrature of flesh on the joints that are in the thread, and make it enter until you know that the flesh is already in the joints of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the thread, and pause in the nose according to the abstraction of the healthy skin a little, and make it so for three days or more until the enguient is corrupted all that is removed from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for some days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Perhaps there are ends of cure that exist, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, which makes distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And if you make use of silver or iron, which resembles a small lantern inserted, thus with a small tube, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canal thus with a tube, and the handle of the instrument is at the tip, plain, uncovered; which is held in the back of it, with which you hold that which you want to suck out of it or what you want of the juices and causes that flow.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these ingredients are precious: a recipe of castor oil, of white clay, of ginger, and pilletre of saffron, of long pepper, of escarot, of epithim of spicy anise. You confound with the juice of bladder and of cabbage, and you make small pills, and one pill is dissolved in lukewarm water, and it is given through the nostrils of the patient who lies on his back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They are born naturally in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Polyps grown are born naturally in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnificent and mentioned in certain days within which a mouth is readied for its observation.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And by means of that you examine what appears at the beginning of its appearance, and you eradicate all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a pause on the area or apply a burning medicine which was previously in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the ulceration is delayed within which it is magnificent, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sentiment, then do not touch that with iron quar it is a cancerous aposteme; for polyps grown are added to that which ulcerates this great malice above that which it had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of a Leon touch and not of dark color, and sometimes the ulceration is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and ulcerate without fear, and cure the area with water that exhales and constrains until it is sanctified.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by resemblance.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when you make a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer with that operation except in certain homes.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you find some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with holy saint, and then adjust the two lips of the plague to suture, and afterwards cure that until it is sanctified.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you extract each part of its apparent code until it becomes holy.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips to suture and strengthen them, and on them sprinkle holy dragon's powder and three times, and place on the powder a piece of fine emplastrum diafinicon, or some other of the consolidated emplasters, and let it lie for two days or three, and then remove that and change that emplaster and let it lie until the wounds are fully closed, and then cure with an ointment until it is sanctified.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles thus as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread thus as you and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Polyps grown are found in some homes in the divided parts of their lips, certain apostemes hard resembling fat errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you convert the lips and find each one of those hardnesses in all parts, and then the abscess fills the place of holy trinity until the saint is restored, and then it is washed with a gentle agreement and the area is cured with water that is stipulated, until it is sanctified.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the ulceration of the flesh adjusted on the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A great number of polyps born above the adjusted flesh of the gum, which the ancient doctors called albulus, therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with an onion or that you hold that with forceps and ulcerate that from its root, and let the healthy blood flow or the saint.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then pause on the holy place of the Trinity or other stipulated powders or excitatives.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then ulcerate it secondarily, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About the root of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and of those from the mouth and between the adjusted gums, there are rough, bitter, and some polyps are blackened and are made citrine or green until the gum is corrupted by that and the teeth are loosened.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, you must make the patient sit between your knees and place their head on your thigh, and feel with your fingers to see if there are any hardened areas or signs of congestion in the veins that may be causing the pain, and this is due to the black bile and citrinitation and other inward disturbances that have become mondified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if it is established that the cause is in those of the beginning of the reasoning, then it is; and if not, then you will continue the reasoning on another day and the second and the third day until you come to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the fingers need various movements of different forms and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason the razor has the quality of being sharp at the point of separation from the teeth, which is different from the razor that is rough between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors should be prepared in a way that you will see soon.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Because you cure the tooth of its pain in all respects and delays in total eradication of it, since there is no cause that supplies the evacuation of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance that excuses itself in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Moreover, because the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, you should be firmly certified of which tooth is painful, since many evacuations alleviate the pain and convince the patient that it is a healthy tooth, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then how can you be certain which tooth is painful, and what you know, then it is necessary that you scarify around the circuit of the tooth with a spatulum in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of the entire part, and then those teeth are loosened, or subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concudes.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then apply force with strong pincers for good articulation or sturdy extraction, and place the patient's head between your thighs so that you hold it firmly without wavering, and then extract the tooth according to rectitude in a way that you do not tremble, nor does the patient experience major pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it beneath the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it, just as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete the drawing of the root and strengthen it at the extremity of a subtle file so that it is not trapped during the time of your constriction over it with pincers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you operate with great precision in the scarification around the entire part of the gum and guard much your strength so that you do not tremble and remove a part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what foolish ignorant barbers do in their ignorance and audacity over the eradication of teeth, as they do not administer what we have recommended; for many evacuations come over the bad teeth, which are more difficult to extract, and the roots of those teeth remain entire, or some of them, or that you extract those teeth with some bones of the jawbone, just as many evacuations have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the eradication of it is washed with mouthwash or vinegar or salt solution.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is excessive bleeding for some time, just as many evacuations have done, then sprinkle a certain quantity of powder and aspersion on the wound, and if it does not stop that bleeding, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and pincers should be subtle, those which are used to extract teeth at the beginning, with a long handle, short and thick, so that they do not become doubled when you need to operate.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And it is also like this with thick handles until when you are experienced with them they do not become doubled, being short and extricated.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian steel, expertly crafted with extracted handles, and in the extracts of those teeth, some enter into others and are strengthened by strong construction, and some evacuations have the shape of a bird's beak, which is called cicinia, so it is guaranteed, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from the jaws that are locked.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is locked in some cause, then it is necessary that you pause on the spot with a border for a day or two until the spot becomes mollified; and then insert the instruments or pincers, which are assembled like a bird's beak called cicinia or guarantee, in the shape of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The external parts of the body are often affected thus, as if by a similar imbalance or defect.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your own judgment and use forceps or tongs, then be careful that you do not scrape the skin and cut into the entire flesh, and introduce the instrument which has the name of atali, so it is a small lever whose form is this.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It should be a short, thick extremity, and not bent in such a way that it does not become tangled.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the skin is scratched open, well; and if not, help yourself with other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus you will be helped with this instrument having two slants of which this is the form, suitable for the following.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the filing of teeth; because you will be making it with this instrument which is assembled on a large hook, and this is the form.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extremity, curved or short, which has some thickness, and not bent in such a way that it does not become tangled.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you will know that the instruments for teeth are moved thus and similarly to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to the material according to what it signifies, and the various illnesses; because they are among the illnesses for which the ancients did not design or pause to create proper instruments, due to the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Moreover, if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are tangled, or if they are loose, then it should be carefully corrected in their place, where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with a gesture whose form is this.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be with some small thickness, little by little, and held or tied in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is scratched open; and then restore the place with convenient medicines suitable for that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Moreover, if there is small pus in the bone, then remove that from the pus and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of teeth prominent above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent and not according to their natural form, it is ugly, and especially when it comes to women, and especially to venerable old women; therefore, be careful that you consider: if a tooth is not in proportion to another tooth, and it is not possible to file or polish it, then root out that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you will extract it with this instrument whose form is this; and it is similar to a pig's bite, and made of Indian iron of extremely sharp extremity.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And it should be your extraction with which you extract it in three days for the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not communicate with other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file it with a file of Indian iron whose form is this.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be all of Indian iron and the margin is thus; and it should be of many small points thus like a file in which they are made agitated, in which the tooth is filed little by little over many days with facility, so that there is no other tooth communicating and adhering.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then bind it with thread, and remove it with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is tangled and holds the tongue, then be careful that you free it until the aspiration of that fraction is stopped and enclosed, and it should be applied so that the tongue does not lead or the speech does not corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of teeth with gold wire or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the teeth in front of concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the patient cannot strengthen over what is lacking, and you have treated that with styptic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then because of this, do not insert gold wire into those that are strengthened with gold and not silver, for silver turns greenish and is loosened after a few days, but gold at no time loses its strength.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And it should be the wire in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the wire and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows into two twisted wires between two joined teeth, or if one or many, until it reaches the fabric to the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then tighten the wire until it reaches the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not joined.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	It is your strictness that strengthens the faith in the veins where the roots of the teeth do not decay.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then remove the superfluous filaments from the veins with forceps or tweezers, and add them to any location in your gestures, and convert them into occultations between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then let it be relaxed thus strongly with a Roman poultice.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	Maybe if it is dislocated or bruised, strengthen it or them with another vein in such a manner that it will be whole at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two decayed teeth, thus as they are often linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two are returned to their proper cement in their respective locations, and they are restored thus as they had been recommended, and they remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not make that unless you are skilled artisans and wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some extracted are suited to some cause of the cow's bones, and it is done in their form as a tooth form, and it is placed in the location where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is below the tongue sometimes becomes relaxed or is naturally loose in which men are born, or accidentally and suddenly injured by a blow that has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth, the existing tissue in the tie being; and elevate the tongue, and then incise those nervous ligaments according to the latitude within which the tongue is freed from its retention.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	Maybe if there is some hardness or denseness, and that has been established by consolidation of the blow, then you inject an oil and separate it according to the latitude within which you have incised the ligament and dissolved the denseness.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not made a fracture in the press of the flesh and that you do not separate here the arteries and veins, and there comes a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the vestige of the incision with warm water or with wine or with cold water; and then pause below the tongue, licini; thus it is customary to hold the patient's tongue below in any way so that it does not consolidate another wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Maybe if there is a flow of blood, pause over the vitreous location, three times; maybe if the blood stops, then cauterize the location with a gentle cautery that is convenient for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it in other causes within which it may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula below the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some extracted occasions accumulate below the tongue, creating a swelling similar to a small node preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and therefore it is magnificent within which it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you break open the patient's mouth, sitting in front of the light and considering the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that place where it is cancer.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onus in it, and incise that with a subtle spatula, and incise it from the whole part; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you pause above three times, thus it is vitreous, within which the blood is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work within which you have treated it with compliment of it, within which it is washed with wine and salt; and cure it with another cure adapted to this within which it may be healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of swelling from two ears and of that which is nothing in the gullet and of other swellings.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you find in the gullet a swelling, so they are glands which are assembled thus, which accumulate beforehand and are called two ears, which when you cure them with this that we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the swelling is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that iron for the flow of blood; unless you let it be until it is matured, and then you treat it, or it will break for itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, radish-like, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, during your operation, if already the swelling has been repulsed with complete repulsion or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then do seize the patient under the sunlight, and the head of it is in the tie, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between their hands before the tongue below with a very noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	Either use silver or copper, and be subtle as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you press on the tongue and show it to him, and he spits on that same vein, then take nine and place it in the amulet, and pull it towards the affected parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you draw from the tunics, and then incise with an instrumental form of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of them is in the interior of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron indeed.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your present, then incise with a spatula of which this is the shape of it: It is pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one spot, incise the other according to this same method of incision, and then apply the incision to the patient's gums with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, apply cold water of decoction of sage or mint leaves and similarly to those of the stopping causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it until it is healthy.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some wounded places in the gullet have other apertures besides those two gold ones, and incise them according to what you have said and done in the incision of two spots equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already medicated a woman with an apostema that was born in her gullet, the apostema which tended to turn dark, with little sensation, which had almost closed her gullet, and the woman breathed with great difficulty, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was about to die if it had lasted for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the apostema had pushed so much that it had formed two ramps inside which they had passed through two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then you examine it thoroughly and find it in one of their eleven, and pull it out, and extract it from the large portion, and then you incise that which comprehends the other tract, and then you oblige the mouth of it, and comprehend its tongue, and then you fix it on the eleven in that apostema.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you remove a large part of it, and nothing flows from it except a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the gullet of that woman was absolutely clear, and soon she began to drink water, and then you prescribed food, so you did not cease to incise from that apostema many times for a long time, and succeeded in incising the apostema in its place, which prolonged it.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you heal and cauterize the gullet of it, then afterwards add to it; and then you walk around and do not know that God did that miracle for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 38.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a wound when it is apostematous.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the wound is located on the skin, and it is apostematous and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a thick and round part, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not conform to it, and sometimes the apostema remains subtle, then it is necessary that you incise that which is rounded and aggregated; and if it is of long duration, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not at its center, then it is necessary that you fear the incision of it, because in that there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you sometimes do it according to the manner that you have described of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument of which it processes its shape and then place it on the eleven in the new, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are said in the incision of two spots.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, because if you incise more, you will lead the serum to speak.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two spots, and cure it until it is healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then use gentleness in the cauterization of it with fear, and the manner of the cautery on it is not just with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient on the same seat, and then press their tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take some water which we have spoken of in the chapter on cauterization, and conform to that living cause, and pause it neither sparse nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	It is the extremity of the concavity in which the medicine is placed, just as the concavity of a hollow ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient will spit or form a mouthful of saliva or mucus from their mouth for the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend into the gullet of it and that it leads to healing.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And you should put your hand in the medicine, and express it onto the uvula for a space of a half hour within which it begins to be absorbed and seated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the vein, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the vein with the cotton into a canal above until the cotton adheres to it, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the vein, and then leave it there for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then perform the cauterization by burning out the circuit of the vein with cotton embedded in the border, and modify what is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure beforehand with embrocation, and remove the bitter humors until it is sanitized.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is more salvageable than incision and longer in terms of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounded eyes are cured with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because they are treated with subfumigation in this manner: take calament, ysop, origan, ruda, Arabic scicados, camomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, into a mixture, and let them steep in warm vinegar, and boil; and let the mixture be washed decently, and be placed in the middle of the mixture, on top of which is placed an instrument made of silver or copper according to this manner; it should be made of silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula above the vein, until the uvula is most decongested.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then iterate over those many wounded areas until it is dry, and beware that you do not perform this treatment at the onset of abscesses, because they would too quickly adjust to the abscess, and do not believe that you are doing it, but rather declare the abscess of the cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and compose it into the extremity of one closed in a hood, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closed hood prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and of what adheres to the gums and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many wounded areas adhere to the gums or thorn of feet or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you will know that you extract what is apparent, on which the sight falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument only under the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the gums.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the gums, you will make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because strongly the annexed cause of the gums will be evacuated by vomiting; or that the patient's throat is cleared with a piece of nap or radish of lettuce or a dry crust of bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and bind it strongly with faith, and then pass the patient through this, so that when you reach the place where the thorns are extracted, then it will be fully evacuated.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And perhaps take an eel and bind it with faith, and place it on the table and subsequently extract it; or take a porcupine and subsequently extract its quills and subsequently extract the intestine.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if you do not fully evacuate with those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it is more gross than a small vein, and in the extremity of the vein is conquered what you insert into its gums with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the old man's head is elevated on them, and beware that the touch of his bones in the throat, so that he does not suffocate himself, and it pierces the bone or the thorn, or that he bites his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Perhaps the patient who inserts himself is worse, because of his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and it pierces him, and he pulls his hand with the instrument on them, all according to the quantity which is prepared until it is fully evacuated.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of bad blood annexed to the gums.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When bad blood is treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and not comforts, consider then the gums of the patient's mouth to the sun, because you have comprehended the tongue of him with an instrument which you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the bad blood, extract it with a small hook or with subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's gums, and place a pause in the concavity of the cannula with an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the bad blood is dead and separated from the gums) and abstain from giving the patient water for a whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full glass of cold water, and put the patient's mouth to it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not give them any cause for nausea or vomiting, but rather keep the water in their mouth for an hour, because the blood circulation is felt almost instantly when the water touches.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Perhaps it is not forgotten in the water that we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cimetic or asafoetida through the instrument that we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Make a draft, it will be ready in four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another manner of operation in the fumigation of that, which is to take a nutmeg and the nutmeg is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a tube; and then give underneath the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cane, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood circulation, because the blood circulation comes almost instantly.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not help, then you will repeat the fumigation many times, and keep the patient from drinking, and give causes of salty foods and soups, and do not give water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which the blood circulation of the gouty patient is treated; and it resembles forceps, also as times, but only because it has a certain curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is applied to the gouty patient, and its end resembles a beak of a stork, which is guarded, in which there is an attachment of lime, so that, when it takes hold of some cause, that does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are many special kinds, of many manners, according to the remembrance of them, as is written in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and section of them for two manners, of which one is for the species of abscesses in their measures; and for that which comprehends the humidities.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is for the places in which accidents of the body happen, because an abscess on the head is different from an abscess on the buttock; and an abscess in a fleshy place happens differently from an abscess in a joint; and each of them is judged according to operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And many abscesses are such that they require not only perforation but also maturation of the wound in those or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Some abscesses are such that they require being drained when they are crossed, and do not mature according to their completion, like abscesses that are close to the joints, because an abscess when it reaches a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can corrode the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it becomes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess close to a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, you will harm the principal member; or it is close to the buttock, therefore perforate without maturation, and do not require a crossed perforation, lest it corrode the surrounding area of the buttock, and become a fistula, or be made in the term of it that it may not be healthy.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You need to know the time for perforating the abscess, and thus it is when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is mature when there is a decrease of pain and cessation of fever, and also a decrease of rigor and pulse, and the acute state of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you need to know that the perforation should be made in the place where the pus is below the abscess and where the pus comes out during the cure of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And perforation is sometimes for the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all hidden places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to delay the perforation of it until the digestion of it is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; because if you perforate that beforehand, it prolongs the body of the pus and of much foulness, and strengthens the lips of it so they are hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Many abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or body which needs it, or according to what the affected member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you know that you should administer small perforation, and in large abscesses a large perforation and ample or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other times the apostemes are in those places where the codena is enclosed and surrounded, when it is made thus that it pains everywhere and it is made in terms of what has already been established, thus as one who accumulates in tropics of doule and of bubbles.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are thus inserted have three angles; and of those that are inserted thus as a figure of the leaf of myrtle, thus as the apostemes of the groin.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of theirs that are administered round section and lunar section, and they seem to be like those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Maybe that which is not capable thus as are superficial apostemes of lions, because you perforate that with a superficial perforation, or you plane only so much.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it happens when the aposteme is large and has already collected much sania, that you perforate it and do not touch that you extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a part of it, and then you open the aposteme another day, and then you extract a larger part, and then you make those motas gradually evacuated according to graduation until it is fully purged.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a green complexion, or pregnant woman, or small child, or old and decrepit, because the animal spirit is resolved to expel the sania with great effort, and it kills the patient, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	And beware of this chapter with great caution, and then make your perforation in which you perforate these apostemes, because you will cleanse the plague and consider thus if the plague of the aposteme is small, or it is a flat section, then you administer the remedies of oil or of antidote; and if the aposteme is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then beware that you pause in some traction until they converge together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the aposteme a part of the codena is cut off or has concaved in the circuit, then beware that you complete it with a cloth very much or with a thread of fil de drap, thus as when you have treated pans or razizos, they humidify; and strengthen it until the third day; and then proceed and cure what is necessary to heal the wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Maybe you encounter a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar in those places where you apply a cloth of oil, and pause that over the area of the flowing blood, gradually evacuated.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	Maybe you preserve the flow of blood, then beware that you administer regimen and cure, and powder those which have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	Maybe it is in winter time, and the place of the aposteme is a place of many nerves, then beware that you apply powders in wine and oil, and pause those over the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then beware that you pause powders mixed with water and oil or wine and oil, and all that is cold until the third day, thus as we have said, and then beware that you dissolve the aposteme and cleanse it and administer the cure of what is convenient to heal.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus it is necessary to know the cure of apostemes universally, maybe according to the way of distinction already said about each aposteme in which manner it is the way of curing them by chapters singularly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the sections of apostemes which come into the codena of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the codena of the small head, little apostemes, and thus of species of nodes which contain tunics that are there in fact; and the species of theirs are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them they are pungent, and of those that contain humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain humidity similar to pores, and they resemble theirs; and of those that are lapideous, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those that do not fear, because it is necessary to extract those that do not make counter-arcadia.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you sprinkle those with an instrument in the form of which you have seen beforehand, which is called entromes, until you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if it contains humidity, then you separate that in sections according to the longitude by section superficially according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line .B. until the line .G. Therefore, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that because it contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of everything, because many evacuated things return, if it remains from some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then you submerge it in Egyptian inguent, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and you fill that with the plague and let it until another day, because all that corrodes everything that remains of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then you iterate over that cloth with Egyptian inguent secondly and thirdly if it is indicated by it, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that skin; then cure the plague with inguent until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if you find a fatty swelling, then you insert it according to this method:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	You make an incision in the shape of a cross, and cut between the two lips of the incision and remove all the infected part, and extract your virtue in removing the tunic that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Maybe you will find an opposing hardness, then make something that you can counteract it primarily.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, you make a lapificated incision of the section and cure according to what you have said; and the incision over the lapificated apostema is less painful, because it is of little bleeding and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some veins are like channels of these apostemas which are in the head of some men where there is no humidity; this causes because you have injected into an apostema on the head of an old woman and you have touched the apostema thus as a rough, asperous, whitish thing, which could not be touched, and if someone had touched it, they would have been plagued by that.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Maybe in the other accidental apostemas on the head another thing is not this capital, thus as the apostemas that come to the heads of children and devour the roots of the ears, maybe the incision of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower part, because it is more comfortable for the body of the patient to have the lowest parts freed.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then heal those in water that are suitable for that kind of cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofula which occur on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Some swollen veins come to these apostemas on the neck and in the axillas and in the armpits; and some swollen veins occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur on the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all scrofula of those has its own proper tunic, and thus as in the nodes and apostema of the head, thus as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofula are many, because some of them are lapideous, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find of good disposition in the Tocament, whose color is manifestly similar to the color of the codena, and it is spread to all parts, and it is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the hardness, and it is not swollen, so that you incise superficially from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line .G. into the line .B., and scrape away all parts, and extend two lips of the codena at once, or many at once if there is need of those, thus as we have said in the apostemas of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is a bad spatium that does not adjust to your hand in incision, or that it bothers the patient, and that it incises what is not necessary to incise; because if you incise a vein or hardness and prohibit yourself from your operation, then stop at the vetriol plague treated with other powders that stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the plague, and lay it inside until the acuteness of the apostema is repulsed and the plague is mollified and begins to be purulent.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood has been drained away.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then investigate if it is said that some cause of the other small scrofula has been removed, so incise those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large scrofula vein, because then you should not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before, because it seems that those are double-layered and very strong, and you should leave them until they fall out by themselves without any harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then heal that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the entire scrofula, then because you adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize as soon as possible so that no supernumerary flesh remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Maybe you think that supernumerary flesh has remained because of the greatness of the scrofula, because you should intend to incise the root of that, and estrange it and administer suture and what has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofula which contains humidity, perforate it with a superficial perforation here where you find the place of maturation of it, and stop the perforation of what is the lowest part of the body, thus as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer perforation, with calques in ointment and similarly to those, so that it corrodes what has been corrupted by the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you have often cleansed the wound thoroughly, then you should heal that generated flesh inwardly so it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	About the section of the pill of the accidental abscess that occurs in the groin area.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They disapproved of these ancient practices in this section, and did not see any man in our land who had made that artificial medicine.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription on the sermon of those ones.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More often in men there is a lack of skill, because the extraction of the pill is avoided, since it cannot be done gently, lest all the veins and major parts of the body are damaged here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	More often in those who have abscesses that burst in the mouth or groin area or two kidneys, when the badness is not in the blood, because they use the section of pill to avoid the loss which is done by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to cut it out, we should incise the pill under three circles of the circles of the pill, or four small sections for the width in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in cipher, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of blood that are there.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, then he should extend the cord of the groin area to the ninth, and then insert the cord inward so it reaches the canal, more avoid the blood vessels if you see them for some reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the membranes according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the weakness which is from that exit, that is from the disorder and for the abortion of the vote.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And then the wound was open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add two lips of the cord of the wound, and thus only the cartilage remains.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow inwardly so it becomes healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And thus says Albucasis that the summary of the sermon which we have recommended, is not but that you see that some of these abscesses have already operated on the groin area of the body, and the body has come to death, and the wing of it is between the legs, and some went to incise the epiglottis so that the body breathes over the place of the wound for some respiration, and it is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command to leave the open wound until the evil of the badness is consumed; and it is the evil of it for three days; and then I command thus the wound, and heal it until it becomes healthy.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my experiments, is that a servant held a knife and placed it in the left groin area and incised one part of the vein of the lung, and I was called to cure him, and I approached him thus as he was dying, and discovered the wound and approached the blood which was coming out of the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I was forced to confess that he had not incised a vein nor guided it, and the wind came out of the wound, and I healed it until it became healthy.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not accuse the servant if he did not return to his duties, and then some days returned to the administration of his own dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the pill there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the section on abscesses that occur in the groin area before, and it is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess named hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, it is not necessary to heal.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is made by nodulation of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not happen that it makes a presumption about him unless he is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that and investigate that which I have told you, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then you incise it thus as the nodes, and extract it from the water that contains the flesh and pus; and otherwise, then it is thoroughly scrutinized throughout the entire being, and then I cure the place where it needs healing until it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	About the section on the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many species of nodes and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I recommend thus the difference between node and exostosis, because it makes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Then it is said that there is an excess of heat and fever and violent pains inside, which settles the turbulence of the superfluity; and it is a completed putrefaction that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Perhaps there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it is a hidden cyst that is next to the sac proper.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a wound and it is made thus as a void, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, because they are fat or contain humidity, and the colors of humidity are many, according to what you say in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then we see, when arriving at the cure of nothing, that you expound on that and inquire into the beginning of the instrument which is called introments, according to what you will find its form in the chapter which is properly assigned to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place where you found humidity in the abscess, and you will revolve the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cavity.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally, place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and finally extract the introments and consider what is written in the residue of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you insert it with a superficial section according to what has been said about the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity in the residue of the introments, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And cut above it with a section having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as you instruct, and suspend that which is once cut, and clear the cavity of all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract that sanity from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	Perhaps if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sanity, and many things are lost, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains from it for any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if there is nothing remaining from it for any cause, little or too much, the node returns according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part remains, then complete the plague of some corrosive sharp powders, and strengthen the plague, and pause over that which sits on the cautious abscess, and cure it with another cure until it is healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you kiss the two lips of it and cure it with that which incarnates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	Perhaps if the pulse comes to the contrary, or non-pulse, then you touch and fill the place of three trissat that is vitriol and leave it straight for two days or three until the plague is poured out and the turbulence of the blood is restored; and finally return to inspect what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	On those that are the forms of the introments, and they are of three species, which of those is large, and of those is medium, and of those is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introment is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium introment is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introment is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Thus made of iron, of alum, of extracted and well-prepared extremities, so that they fasten the instrument in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiences, and they are named "albered", and one of those is called "berid".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three species, because of those is large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experience, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium experience, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experience, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they are for those abscesses and exits and fistulas and swellings, so that among them there are those of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are thus rounded, large, leons, thus with large agulhas in which there are sewn the seams, and they are made of pure citrine, or of pure iron, or of silver, And the better ones are when they are made of pure citrine.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are thus the experiences of black plum, which ones agree that for those there are opened the fistulas in the cavity of which ones are reflected, that are reflected with their lightness in those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three species, because some of those are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the amble of the fistula and the structure of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large experience of plum:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium experience of plum:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small experience of plum:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the ulcers are from various special motives, because those that are simple, like a solitary curvature, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their open ulcers are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those ulcers that have two curvatures, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And theirs have three curvatures, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these things are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple ulcer, form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple ulcer:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple ulcer, form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large open ulcer:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium-sized open ulcer, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small open ulcer, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large ulcer having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized ulcer having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small ulcer having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels that are used to cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and they are of three species, because those are large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those that are made for sharp section and the other extremities not for dull sections, and they are not paused in such a manner, but rather to be made smoothly in the excavation of the nodes, fearing the incidence of vein or nerve injury, and so that the patient may be healed and tranquility may be attained by adjusting little by little to avoid the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of emollients, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small, just like you see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large emollient:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium-sized emollient:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small emollient:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	There are four kinds of errant humors and they resemble the roots that are in the humor and are made into a poultice.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the pointed extremity of the hidden abscess and in that correct place you will find the divided and defined parts, when you want, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are used to search between the fingers for the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventoses that absorb the flow of blood, and they are of three species; large, medium-sized, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	There are four kinds of citrine humors, round and with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these species of ventoses are large, medium-sized, and small, so that they absorb the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, they are not used to absorb blood in every part of the body, and they are only used in fleshy areas, such as on the thighs and legs, and on the arms, and on the breasts, and abdomen, and genitals, and similarly to their use on fleshy areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some evacuated areas are made of those other small instruments similar to scisors according to this form; for which the blood is absorbed when it is made through phlebotomy, or there is incidence of vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some evacuated areas are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some evacuated areas are swollen breasts of some men who have the complement of sleeping with women, and they are swollen breasts, and similar to the breasts of women, and Roman abscesses, ulcers.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to he who has that, it is necessary to make incisions in those areas with lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then excoriates the entire grossness, and then fills the plague of incarnated medicine, and then adjusts the two labial lips of the plague with cosideration, and cures he who is within so that he may be healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the lower parts and is mollified by its greatness just like in women, then it is divided into two lateral sections under the nipples, with two lunar-like sections, each of which contains one in the other so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. And then excoriates the codena which is between the two labial lips of the plague, and removes the pungency, and administers what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary in the cure so that it may be healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which covers the inflamed area of the patient, and for flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with submergent corrosive powder and apply that corroding agent which is Roman grey powder, and then heal that wound so it may be healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the piercing of abscesses that come from beneath the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from beneath the nipple are of the type of scrofula, hard, which contain a fluid that is sacred.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those so some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity it is necessary to incise them with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is in the abscess of the vein has been evacuated, then you complete the wound with a lot of cotton and leave the entrance open for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound should be dressed and treated in a conveniently absorbent way, until it is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the type of nodes, and of scrofula, then you should make an incision above it as we have said in the section on scrofulous swellings.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it the cautery as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	About the incision of abscesses that occur through arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the codena (a type of vessel?) is consolidated which is above it, then many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is through an artery, it is often felt in the pulse of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor (a whistling or rustling sound) in the veins.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through a vein is recognized by the obvious signs of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the incision above this abscess is erroneous, and it is especially worse in those that are beneath the ribs, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to avoid its cure with iron, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, it is necessary to evade.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	It is better about that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, to make an incision in the codena (vessel) at length; and then to open the incision with a hook, and to expose the artery, and to remove the tunics until it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle above that vessel and make it penetrate into the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to have dominance in extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then puncture the place that is between two ligaments with a spatulum until all the blood that is in it is drained out, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which is generated pus until the ligaments are clean; and then treat it conveniently with absorbent materials until it is healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess by incision of a vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what is possible of the abscess in the codena (vessel), and then introduce the needle beneath the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double filament until you extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a good ligament according to what has been said to you about the ligament of the uva4 (a type of vessel?) of two parts at the extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	It is better if you extract the thread, then introduce the thread into that needle beneath all the abscess from the incision of the first needle, and constrict the four threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then cut the abscess in the middle place of it until when you have sat what is in it, then you incise the superfluity of the vessel, and leave what is left of it tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over the pus which has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with warm baths and convenient absorbent materials until it is healthy.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 51: About the abscess that occurs through torsion of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they occur through their percussion or through excessive superfluity, and through similarity.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done in the best way in the places of the joints or of the ankle, or in all places where the joints are weakened.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and it is similar in color to the other body, and it is among the major dispositions of its own will, and when it is stricken with vehementia, it seems like the patient has a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess added to the chest of the body, and therefore the coding is discharged, and it is already entirely divided and does not go to the fore or rear parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it does not seem that they were invaded by iron, because their strong contraction is contrary.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Maybe that which is on the head or on the forehead feels the coding in a spasm.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Maybe if it is a small abscess, then you have those with forced evacuations and absorb that which is rooted.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it in a hook, and excavate that, and then remove it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter fifty-one.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of abscesses that occur on the skin that occur on the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It is found in some homes that there are many moist places in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those that are called fungal because of their similarity to fungi, from which the root is subtle and at the head of that is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those that is small, and it is of those that is very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in the belly of that there were two of those that were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white things, with a small root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inward and were split, and humidity flowed from that at all times.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I inserted them and extracted it in one weight of eighteen ounces. and the other weighs six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation on the insertion of their is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, with a subtle root; then you insert them with a spatula flat, and you are in your presence burning with cauterizing fire, because many moist places need to expel much blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is pale and trembles, beware of inserting iron; maybe then take a small piece of recently made lead, and strengthen it on that tissue, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust on the structure of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease strengthening the large lead grain in the tissue, until it is absorbed and falls through its own efforts.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Maybe if the tissue is of large root, then in the insertion of it there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Maybe it is possible that you insert the marrow of it, and then cauterize that so it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to insert the tissue that is of dark color, of little sensation, of light regard, because that is almost cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will find a remedy for cancer in this way also.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter fifty-two.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of inflammation of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Inflammation of the navel is caused by many causes; or from fissures of the ciphac which is above the belly, and they draw out the web or intestine according to where it ends in other ruptures; or from blood that flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or from constricted wind in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	Maybe if it is from a fissure of the ciphac and by settlement of the web, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it has a lion's pain, and then appears in diverse situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is from an egression of the intestine, then the situation of that is in water that we have recounted, with maybe very vehement diversity, and as you press that in the ties it is hidden, and then returns; and strongly it is in water so, and it is magnificent with much entrance of bath and vehement effort.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Maybe if it is from humidity, then it is a lion and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it created.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is from blood, then there are those signs that appear with the abscess in black and declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	Maybe if it is from bad flesh, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	Maybe if it is from wind, then the touch of it is a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider then if the inflammation of the navel is from blood of artery, or of vein, or from wind; then it is necessary to prohibit the cure of it, because in that there is fear and pain also as I have written in the chapter where I said about abscesses from artery and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the inflammation of the navel is from the intestine or from the web, then it is necessary to command the patient to hold their belly still, and be standing extended; and then place a tent in the circuit of the whole navel, and then command it to stay turned between the two hands above the belly, and then circulate with a spatula flat in the circuit of the navel around the area where you have felt the tension; and then extend the marrow of the abscess to the parts below in an ounce grain; and then place it in the circuit with strong faith or with a decent manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And if you have extended the membrane of the apostema over the ligament and inserted the thin tie into that index finger and it reaches the intestine; and if you have not encountered or guarded by the ligament, then extract the hardened parts and push the intestine back into its proper place in the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have encountered the membrane, then take hold of it with an unción; and remove the excess fluids from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Perhaps it is opposed to your artery or vein, then circle around that motion, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two strong veins and insert the two needles into the circuit which has formed around the apostema in a manner of crossing, which allows them to penetrate; and then strengthen the apostema in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area between where the extended flesh can be seen and fall for itself; or remove that which is subtle and falls away, and then cure that wound which covers the ulcers within so that it may be healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh or due to humidity, then cover so that you conquer the apostema as we have said and remove the blood or humidity, which it attracts in itself, and then cure that wound which covers and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have spoken, in the division, of a type of cancer and in what manner it is necessary to go about the treatment of it with medicines, and that it is essential to avoid ulceration during the treatment so that it does not spread; and we have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution is required for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the doctors say that some vegetated cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, just as with cancer of the kind which is in the breasts or in the thigh and has a resemblance to the limbs allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	Perhaps when it is old and large, it does not cover that which belongs to it, because you cannot be healthy from that ulcer nor have I seen another, nor has it been possible to reach that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is as we have said, that you should purge and evacuate the patient of black bile, and then cut away the malignant growth, if it has been encountered with a manifest relapse.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which the location of the operation is, and prohibit in the tract any uncleanness that covers it; and then concave all parts of the code so that a good perexcrutacio occurs without leaving any cause of the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that leakage, and express the locations, and abstain from the thick blood all at once with your hand or instrument which is possible among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps if you have made opposition to the thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that within so that the flow of blood ceases, and then cure it with another cure so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, for the treatment of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not except for the species of altitudes alone, and it does not approach with iron to the species of tympanitis nor to the species of hypsocha, because that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of dropsy tympanitis with medicines and do not combine your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already been debilitated, or it is another disease, another dropsy, just as it is in the tonsils or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Perhaps if you have seen the patient with an exuberant vertigo, and it is not another disease but only dropsy, and neither infant nor old, then the manner of the operation on it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and minister to him to expel the belly of it with his own hand, by pouring water at the part below the navel, and then take spiny spatium according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp points, long and pointed at the extremity, like a spatium; perhaps meanwhile it is in something brief, little by little, so that during the operation it does not pass into the intestine, and that leads to that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from parts of the intestines, because then it covers that you should section yourself alone at the navel for a quantity of three fingers below, in the right direction above the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Perhaps if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of it is through the mixing, then your section should be in the right direction.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not cover that your section should be over the ribs, on which you want to move the patient so that the excessive fluids do not accumulate at that spot frequently.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then perforate with the instrument the entire code, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand between the code and the siphac, and you will excavate it; and if it's the quantity of an ounce or around.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then perforate the siphac until you reach the spot where you want to evacuate, and it is there that the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or gold, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its extremity is shaped like a feather, thus sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper extremity of it there is a handle, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it draws upon the instrument, thus evacuating the water in the desired quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it will not cover it in an hour, and the patient will die from resolution of their animal spirit, or it will approach the fifth crisis, which is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	You evacuate it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what is signified to you by the dispositions of the patient's virtue, of the pulse of it and of its goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because it is retained so much by the code that retains the hole which is over the siphac, of which I recommend to you that you perforate it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then try the instrument another day if the patient tolerates it sometimes, and extract a small quantity of water, and do it for several days on tempered fear, and beware of error lest you don't remove enough water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and let go of a great quantity of water, then cure it with embalming in hot sand, and bury it in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure it with desiccative medicines until it is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the mixing and the feet, as you have recounted in what has been said before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 5.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the cure of children whose urinary passages are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some born children are thus from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or has a narrow passage or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it is necessary to open the perforation of it as soon as it is born, with a very subtle instrument according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then stop in the hole a small key of lead and tie it, and you will pass three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the spot will not release this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that one whose hole is narrow should be medicated with a lead key, as we have said, for many days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are led astray, which causes it because of those, that one who is born with a hole is devoid of the end of the verge for he cannot urinate at the divided parts, until he elevates the verge with his hand to the upper parts; and it is not according to generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother, and it is a very bad malady.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of operation on it is that the patient is placed on their back, and then extend the head of the verge with your left hand in a vehement extraction, and insert the head of the verge at the spot of the perpucii in a very subtle place, thus like an insertion of feathers, or that you do not touch any part, so that the middle of the verge seems similar to the head of the verge and that the hole falls into its proper place according to what is necessary.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of flux of blood, because many times it happens thus; and stop yourself at the moment when it absorbs the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 6.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the whiteness that happens in the perpucii at the head of the verge and of corruption and blackness and adherence of the perpucii to the head of the verge.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many born children happen to have this whiteness in the verge and it is a sign of bad flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	It is not malignant, because you should suspend the thin and subtle parts in that area until it penetrates the entire world; and then pause over the subtle joint, making an Egyptian poultice; and then apply it, so that the thin part is sanctified during the day.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if it is malignant, by white colour, then you should administer cautery at the incision site and according to its ratio.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Perhaps if it is in the foreskin of the penis uncircumcised, and one part of it is behind the foreskin and another part is in front, then you should remove the part that is behind to consolidate it; and then you cure what is in front, because when you cure what is behind, it is not assured that it will not be troublesome.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also it happens similarly in the genitals and in the black and corrupted foreskin, therefore you should conquer all that which is already denigrated and which wants to corrupt or has become corrupted; and then place liniments on that with good milk, which is contaminated with powder of scorpions and of bitter roots and crivellations.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then heal it with another healing treatment until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Perhaps if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because youthful cautery is in two dispositions at the same time, thus there is a flow of blood and a plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and is totally destroyed at that hour, then you should introduce into the middle of the foreskin a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in that one whose foreskin is sound, and over it no circumcision has been performed; and when adherence occurs due to plague or aposteme) then you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely liberated.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to detach those exquisite things, then you should scrape with a spatula for some reason of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a subtle drain, which has already been softened in cold water so that they do not adhere again another time.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it is cured with a six-day treatment until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 47.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the cure of what occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity thus with the other plagues: perhaps it will be better if it is from our operation and our will, and those of that are properly in the children, it is necessary to assign them to a better operation and way, lest they lose their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use it in their writings, and it is only because they acquired it through experience, which causes them to have discovered the majority of the artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a new and terrible torment; and they used ligament with faith and incision with a fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these ways and did not discover better purification with forceps, with ligament with faith, which in purification is with the fingernail, because many times the code is fled from below, because the code of the foreskin has two tunics, and one tunic is below, and therefore it is forced to another incision and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the purification which is done by alphabecation, and it is digital, of which the sabatiers make use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secured, because therefore it enters into its canal.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	Perhaps in the operation with the fingernail, therefore you obstruct iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the code of the child is brief by nature, and many times it is veiled in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Perhaps of the purification that is done with forceps and ligaments with faith, the goodness, experiment has discovered for me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, for what the acuity that is below is thus with the acuity that is above; and therefore as you take your hand so proportionally, and incise accordingly in one time; and it is done with compression of the faith in a figure containing the code of the penis of all parts, in which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the primary operation is that you make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, so that you do not do anything except hold the faith in its penis only thus, and that you leave it until another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then you will make that joyful spirit whole in all that manner which is at your disposal to receive its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then you will have that standing between your hands positioned preparedly, and it should not be seen; hide the forceps in your hand or let them fall to the ground, so that the child does not see them nor any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then you will insert your hand into the patient's groin and blow into the colon, and pull out what is ejected from the head of the groin, and then you will proclaim that which is added to it as a result of the disorder.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then you will read the marked place with double faith, and then you will bind below that one small ligament, and then you have said to him to hold the foot in good retention, and insert it between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then you will raise the colon higher and extract the head of the groin; and then you will let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and pause powder on top and over the powder place a drap in which is spread a lot of oil from a cow that has eaten rosat recently; and let that sit there another day; and cure that with care until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps is for proclamation, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some of them are extramitated not-twisting and the others are twisting, so that it is not seen the branch of the nail, and it is the length of the two fingers thus as the length of two wrist-joints.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in proclamation is because you forcibly evacuate the entire internal colon, or part of it that comes out with the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So you should extend that from your time at your fingernail before the postulation of the place and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with a hook and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed, and you see that it is inflamed below the postulated groin, then let it be until the postulated abscess has ripened, and excavate that which is facilitated, and incise it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the groin, lest you hurt what is there.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so cure it with that which the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised from the colon above measure, and you have opened the parts above, that which is not known to him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And but cure it with that which we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 48.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by stone or by congealed blood, or by hernia or by flesh, and it seems similar to those things that we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the retention of it is due to a stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then you will place the feet of that one on his knees and extend the knee of the belly from the part above his knees, and the patient should stretch his knee as much as is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So then the neck of the bladder is constricted for the expulsion of the stone to the back parts, so that the urine is absorbed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved in that which we have said is the vehement cause of the patient, then it is necessary to administer an extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and very subtle, like a canal of pea-sized hole subtlety in a ray long and similar to a palm and a half, at which there is a subtle canal in its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of evacuation of urine for that is to take the double-edged file and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good ligation; and you will insert the extremities of the file into the part below the syringe, and incise with forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but then introduce it into the canal with vehemence. And then you will bind the syringe with a bandage and album of cow.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on a chair, and wrap the bladder with its groin in olive oil and olive water, and anoint it with oil of olives and aeguinros.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then you will introduce the syringe facilitated until it reaches the root of the groin; and then you will double the groin below at the part of the navel; and then you will fill the syringe with that; and then you will fill it until it reaches the bladder, and that cures the patient of the void cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes to tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the finger into the little woollen cloth, because the urine dries the little wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and make it a cure for urine, and use a circle, do not stop until the bladder and the patient's thighs are alleviated.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 6.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	About the quality of enema of the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments which are suitable for that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers occur in the bladder or abscesses, or there is congealed blood in it, or it is obstructed by pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then make an instrument called a clamp, and this is its form.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But in the extremity of it is a hole, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three tubes: two from one part, and sometimes others.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is what is being poured, and it follows according to the quantity that opposes it, until when some cause is withdrawn from the humidity, it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what makes the clamp hold fast in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to draw humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and pull with that water which is poured into the upper parts, because the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of the clamp into the rod according to what we have recommended in the circle; and then pour the humidity with that water which pours, because this humidity passes into the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle syringe in which the bladder is syringed, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or of gold, of which the head plus also resembles a small feather, and there is a channel underneath for the ligament.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to inject into the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the syringe into the rod.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that this humidity has already passed into the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make it into that circle; and perforate it with all its retentiveness; and then insert strong thread into those tubes, so that they are revolved; and then add the circle so that it is also added to the relief, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and olis and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that to the instrument and make it so that it is made like it was made for the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity passes into the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 12.
De extraccio de peyra.	About the extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone in which the surgical operation is done by hand, and the section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now present it with a clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is ejected from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels his rod, and many times it is drawn, and then it is dressed; and in this way they have for a long time had pain in their anus.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is difficult to heal the health of children with that until they have reached 14 years; and it is a difficult cure in old people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is easier for that because it is among those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which the stone is greater and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with a syringe which extracts all the filth that is in the sick veins; because that filth sometimes prohibits the evacuation of the stone due to the investigation of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient is pressed with his own feet and is constricted and massaged below for so that the stone descends to the floor of the bladder, or jumps from its place sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and his hands are like the cinctures of it, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And prepare that entire area beforehand.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, then you touch it immediately with a dry cloth over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel the entire toe at once, then cover it with olive oil on the indicated spot of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or anointed finger if they are young and complete, and insert that in the hollow of the back.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And prepare the stone to extract it from beneath the toe indicated.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that small thing little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And apply pressure above it on the indicated toe, and expel it through the parts beforehand you feel the pain.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister to extend their right hand downwards towards the genital area, and hold their other hand under the codena which is beneath the genitals, in the part where the pain is felt.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatulum between the skin to make an incision in the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and divide the water that is between the back and the genitals, not in the middle place, but beside the left thigh; and the pain is about that stone and the indicated toe, and it is a transverse pain, so that the previous pain may be broad and stretched according to the quantity that you feel from the stone as possible, and no more, because you compress the indicated toe which has the stone in the back, and it is forgotten by its difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you know that the stone has some corners and margins, because its extraction is made difficult by them.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that water it seems like a similar thing to a bean, and it is round, and it is made of the lighter extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it's that one with corners and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it's not forgotten, then cover that with a poultice, or strengthen around it in a decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on what you strengthen over the stone, and do not evacuate from it; or insert beneath it a subtle curved instrument.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot operate on that, then you amplify the treatment a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it with a strong vitriol ointment.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you thrust your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it beneath it; and then thrust in a little water; and similarly it seems that there are many more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it's a very large stone, then ignorance is that you insert it with great pain, because it happens to the patient for one of two causes: either death or it prevents the continuous flow of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion of it from within so that it is forgotten, or engage in the fracture of it with the forceps within to extract it by pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And put on that drained pus in oil and wine, or in oil of roses and fresh water, so that the aposteme may be cooled down.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then reposition the patient on their back, and do not disturb the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been disturbed, bathe the area with water and much oil, and then take care of it with gentle daily ointments and gentle daily balms until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there occurs an aposteme of hot and corrosive nature, and it seems thus as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the egress of the blood with the urine), then insert the indicated toe into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it provokes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply opposition to all species, with that which is convenient for its cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover in the hours of all the cure that you read with both hands and adjust the medicines which are paused over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and it's in the middle of the bladder, and it's stuck in it, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then cure it with what you have recommended beforehand, because many times it happens that you feel pain; and already you have exposed this, and it is that you take a perforator of iron or steel, the shape of which is thus:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, pointed, fixed on a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take faith, and bind it to the bladder beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then you thrust the iron into the wound, making a perforation so that the perforator goes to that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	You rotate the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you perform the perforation of it until the other part's penetration is facilitated; for the urine will soon be absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then you place your hand on that which is freed from the stone of the affected part before the wound, because it is drained, and it is flushed out with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Perhaps this cure is not suited to you for some reason that prohibits it, then apply a fig leaf underneath the stone, and another fig leaf above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then you enclose the stone in that wound between two bandages.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then you extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then you dislodge the ligament and clarify the congealed blood, which is done in the plague.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to dislodge the fig leaf underneath the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligament above, because when you dislodge the fig leaf, the calculus returns to its place and takes away the plague.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary for you to remove the fig leaf above, so that you elevate the stone to the upper parts, or return to your own complement, and take away the plague as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 16.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Perhaps you see a stone in some of them, then the cure of it is difficult, and it is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman's strength is weakened.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who is skilled in science who can describe the measurement of the doctor when it is cast, or it is among women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you do not find a woman who is knowledgeable in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth reason is that the place of the surgical incision for stones in women is far from the place of the stone, because it requires a deep incision, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Perhaps it is necessary to provoke you to this, then it becomes known that you have taken a woman of middle science, and few are experienced.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Perhaps you are deprived of that, then seek a middle-quality woman who is subtle, or present a mature woman who is skilled in the affairs of women, or a woman who in this art has a share of the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore make that present, and command to him that he do all that you will order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that it regulates if the woman is weakened, then it becomes known that he put his finger in her fundament and seeks the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if you find that, cut away beneath his finger, and then command him to make an incision above that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Perhaps if it is not weakened, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the cavity of the patient and inquire about the stone, since she places her left hand on the bladder, and takes it with good comprehension.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if you find that, then it becomes known that you gradually remove it from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts with gentle movements of your hand until you arrive at that point in the cavity.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then you make an incision above that position of the majority of the cavity towards the point of the hollow of some part being stopped by him and sent to the stone in that part, and his finger is not removed from the stone, cutting away beneath it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision is small at the beginning; and then you insert the rod above that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the quantity which you know that the stone will be extracted from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the species of stones are many: because among them there is small and large, and rough and smooth, and long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many species are of it for that which you signify above that which you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the glass vessel in that place and leave it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure that you prepare yourself with the instruments which are said to be used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which is incised, then you pause and sprinkle powder on the place and strengthen it with compresses and descent, and do not iterate that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because if you weaken it, the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood is calmed, then place some warm cloths, and afterwards you return to your operation so that the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	About the section on hernia treatment.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not just an addition of humidity in the white bladder which is below the kidney containing the fluid, and it is called white bladder.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some vegetables are in the proper pannicule which prepares nature at the part of the fluid, so that it is believed that there is another fluid; and it is the kidney between the white bladder which we have mentioned, and it is not anything but bitter.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the kidneys, so that at times it is found in this matter, and some veins are affected by percussion or a blow on the kidneys.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrus or blood-red, or red, or it is black and filthy, or it is whitish, and that is what is worst.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that there is this addition of water are these: because if it is in the white bladder which we have mentioned, then the abscess is declining a little in length, thus forming a figure like a fluid, and the kidney appears, because the humidity contains all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper pannicule, then the abscess is declining at the part of the fluid and thus one estimates that it is another fluid.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the kidney and the white bladder, then one feels it below the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you sprinkle the color of the humidity in the abscess amidst the crusty matter from which the form is preceded; and according to what has been examined in the vestige of the crusty matter, one judges that it is deduced from it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the cure of the iron deficiency, then it is necessary that we command the patient to take flea-bitters if it is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the iron.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then he should be suspended above two seats about some cause a little higher, and stop below the word drops.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then you sit on the left side of it, and command the minister to follow on the right side of it, which extends its rod from two lateral lines to the kidney and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and separate the kidney from my own place for the length, in order to prop up the pelvis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make a section according to the rectified engagement of the line that divides the pelvis of the kidneys, until it reaches the white bladder, including.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excavate that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not insert that; and your excavation is the one that excavates for the part just as it is suspended in the fluid worse and subtly scrutinized in the excavation according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the full bladder of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two labia of the section with unciae, and extend the bladder to the upper parts; and do not touch the kidney including, and insert the bladder in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert it in its totality or in pieces, and enlarge the seat subtly, because if you do not precisely scrutinize the insertion of it, it is not made securely so that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the fluid proceeds from that defect of its kidney at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the bladder, return to it, and then adjust the two labia of the kidney with a suture, and then heal it thus as the other wounds, until it is healthy.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the fluid corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you lift the vessels which are above the suspenders, and extract the fluid, and then heal it thus in the way that we have mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is added to two similar parts, then you know that two are the hernias; therefore insert that part according to what you have done in the other engagement; and if it seems to you that it is a work, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you purify the blood, and enter into the sections of the submerged lancet or in the rozated oil; and stop before another lancet which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over two kidneys and the miracle of the belly; and stop above the double drops and powders, and bind them above the liament which is according to this form.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two drops and fill the lancet with carmenated oil according to this resemblance; and make points on the extremities which are premised of cotton or humid lancet, and add them in structure to the breech of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes hold of the buttock up to the two, and the second takes hold at the part of the pelvis, and two extremities above two thighs below and two other extremities above two hips, and all the structure is adjusted in the breech of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Some hernias are artificially medicated with cautery in the place of sectioning a vein; and it is that you take a subtle cutting cautery and insert it into the code of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what has been recommended until it discovers the white cicatrix containing water, and then you take cautery according to this form.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled with a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that cicatrix, and it is ignited until all the humidity is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cicatrix to the inch, and scrape it with an inch, and scrape it with a subtle ignited cautery; and insert it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the hour when the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more saving and more distant from flux of blood, and better than an operation with section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you find an opposite aposteme that is cautious at the hour of section or at the hour of cautery, or flux of blood, then it is seen that you cure whatever opposite aposteme you have for that, with a curative treatment that is convenient to him according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is poor, and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then administer piercing according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified by you, for that which we have said about the signs, that this hernia is aqueous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is seen that you place the patient on some elevated seat, then pierce the aposteme at the lowest part of the spatium, and pause the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it is the wide perception until all the water corrodes.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then pause over the short place and lift that and leave it there, so that the remainder of the water corrodes.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if the opposite is at the edge of the water at that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except to quarantine the white pannicle in the orifice of the wound, which makes an opposite and prohibits the issuing of the water, then it is seen that you put into the wound a penal instrument or one from which the water is extracted from the hydropips, the form of which is preceded; or adjust on the edge of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and it is augmented after six months or in those environments; and when it is augmented, then it is pierced according to that measured manner, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On section about fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the section about this hernia, there is a lost fear of perniciousness in the major dispositions; because to me it has been seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are remembering the operation on that and the species of the apostemes.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the apostemes are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: either for acute superfusion of agrimony, which is abundant in the genitals, or for percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is not troubled in the pain, and it is a heavy aposteme.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And indeed it is an aposteme that is lapped, of which the color is dark, and it is not felt in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some hernias are done for nodulation of the arteries, and for inflammation of those things that have already been perceived, or for inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is for inflammation of arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the aposteme when it comprehends them with the fingers of the tongue; and it does not touch that.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is done for inflammation of a vein is not dispersed from it by any cause, unless the compression is with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species a section was made and on the other carnal parts; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and then stop the hour at the divided parts above, and extract that from the white cicatrix, and release the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensors so that you release that from all division of the parts of the hour.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the hour is already in those consolidated carnal parts, then it is seen that you extract the hour and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if it is adhesion until some cause of the cicatrix, or between what is between the veins, then it is seen that you release all that adhesion and insert it for a rounded incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it is seen that you insert all that which is of it, and extract the hour thus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then, since your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin oil and rose water; and take care to heal that other wound properly so it may be healthy.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernia, which is a vital matter.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess enveloped by a swelling similar to a bruise, which causes softening of the testicles, and makes difficult the exercise of movement and walking on the affected part.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness it is necessary to fear for that water which is preceded by remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I believe that I should describe the operation in that second way that I did for the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should place the patient on a raised chair; and then apply suspensors to the testicles at the lower parts; and then tie the cods of the genitals with threads in the form of little bags which are attached to the verge; and hold those other ministers that you have, and extend them with vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert a spatula under the agutta to make a cross-section in the right direction of the veins so that the veins are discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape out the entire affected part thus as you have said in extracting the roots of the arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those a needle in which there is double faith, and bind it to the first of the places where the vital spirit accumulates, and bind another one at the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert them in the middle place to make a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added by the foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with a cure of the other wounds in which you want to be healthy and not to be generated again, so that the veins may not become inflamed, for it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the vital spirit accumulates in all the veins, then it is necessary that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for that reason are removed from the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment for the growth of the veins, and that they are stabilized, or that they are removed so that they do not grow again in those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by section that ends in the extended ciphac above the belly on the part of the anguinary veins of the miracle of the belly, so that by descending the intestines of that rupture to some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the ciphac or of the excretion of it, and it occurs in these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by falls, or by shouting, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the ciphac, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that engulfs within before the belly can comprehend that the ciphac has taken in the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is by section of the ciphac, for at the beginning it causes vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess that appears diverse and apparent below the fallen cod, and that is by evacuation of the intestine, and the body of it is in the parts before the ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some protrusions are forgotten in the intestine like a web, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some protrusions are made in the ventosity, and some protrusions corrode in the intestine's end, and here it is retained, and it is with that great perniciousness of the illness, and some protrusions cause bad pain and worsening when it is premature.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the species of this illness iron is feared, because it is necessary that the cauterization be avoided in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand at the inner parts of their own cavity if they obey the return of their health, and then it is placed on the hollow column between their two thighs, and elevate their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stop the cod (codpiece) which is the cod of the testicles at the upper parts, and insert the entire cod of the testicles for the whole length; and then place in two lips of the section uncis according to what is necessary to close the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that you think it is possible that from that the hole may be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape out that ciphaqueth which is beneath the cod of the testicles, until it is discovered the white hard ciphac from some part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert the thread said in that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white ciphac, which is beneath the cod of the hole, and between the ciphac according to, and absolve with that adhesion which is in the part behind the hole.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then you should put the mallet on the back of the testicles, and also extend the white membrane to the left side, and raise the bone to the corresponding part of the section; and command the minister to extend it further and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind the complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	There is a search for the ties that make sure there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white membrane during the duration.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	Perhaps you have found some cause of it, then you will fill that into the belly from below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle with which you make four threads of X-shaped fibers, and insert it from the back of the section, which is behind the testicles, where the intestine is; and then you sew up the extremities that are joined by the thread so that there are four fibers, and arrange them in a figure resembling a cross; and place it on the section about which we have said that it is behind the testicles with a strong ligament of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then you envelop the extremities of the fibers and place them with a strong ligament inside so that some of the veins that nourish them cannot transmit any cause, so that from here on, an abscess does not occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another ligature according to the first ligature, a long way from the three ties; and then you place these two ligatures on the section which is behind the testicles, as much as the greatness of the finger, and sew up all the remaining part in a round shape, and remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then you sew up in the part behind the testicles for a section of which the flow of blood and sanity will also run, as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then you administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause on the plague; and administer the ligature which we have recommended (and some times the white membrane is cauterized, which we have said to administer for the sake of the flow of blood, because many times it happens that they accumulate) and release the ligature so that it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	Perhaps the delay of the treatment is late, then the warm water should be poured, and pause on that until it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then you heal the plague with another healing of the plagues until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	On windy hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it has not been seen that anything has been hardened under the treatment of the iron hammer.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first doctors said that it was done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is at five; which is to place the veins near the section above the iron hammer that has been facilitated by it; and then you cut in the middle of the surroundings, surrounding the abscess with what overflows from there, until the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the plague according to what we have said until it is cured.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the disruption that occurs in the ankle joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the ankle joints as we have said, and it swells up in that place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not point out any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns to its natural state in a few hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	Perhaps if the time is prolonged in this, an adjusted fissure is made in the section so that it points out the intestine in the section; and it happens for the extension of the section which is in the ankle joints as we have said, which causes it to be extended, and then it becomes soft and pus-filled at the place and swells up.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery as we have previously described in the narrative of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on their back between the two hands, and then you cut the place of the rupture of the abscesses that swell up in a section according to the width of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then you strengthen the white membrane that is behind the intestine until it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then you take the rod and pause it on the prominent place of the section, and press it onto the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then you kiss the two prominent places on the extremity of the rod of the section, and adjust one to the other with a suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then you extract the extremity of the rod, and do not sew up the entire section, nor extend the bone, nor any other cause as we have said in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then you heal it with the treatment of plagues, and as you sew up the fibers, purify it and restore the plague until it is consolidated; because the section is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	About the softening of the coding of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The coding of the testicles is softened in some men who are affected by it, because the flesh that is between them is softened, and its examination is hindered.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for one who is engaged in the cure of it to make the patient lie down according to his two hips, and to wrap the entire coding which is softened over the natural coding; and then adjust the two lips at the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, then in the beginning, apply a triple or quadruple bandage to the softened coding and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and then heal by healing the other wounds within, so that it may be healthy and the veins may flow.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	About Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	I know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I am led to remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two reasons: one is so that science may be known by the doctor who is expert in it, who knows its cure when it occurs; and the other reason is that we often need castration of other animals to improve our own stock, such as mules, cows, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by section of the seed.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	Moreover, in that which is done by attrition, the way of operation is that we make the animal stand still in hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand within, so that they are resolved and do not appear to be touched.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Moreover, in castration done by section and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the coding of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspenders, and insert above each tube in one section until two tubes are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then insert those pus that you will have extracted from somewhere.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any of the cifix on the body for any reason, except the subtle cifix which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And in this manner of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly loosens the coding of the testicles so that the animal desires to couple.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	About the cure of Hermaphrodosia.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodosia in men is according to two ways: one is when it appears in that which occupies the space in the coding of testicles, in which there is a figure of a woman's cunt, which they feel.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some veils of that cord obstruct the urine which is in the coding of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Moreover, in women it is a species: and it is that the cunt of the woman on the perineum is similar to two testicles of a man, a little smaller in all its miniatures, and similar to the perineal partition of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: two from men and one species from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you insert those flesh adjusted until the impression of that is effused, and then you cure with the cure of the other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine flows, which is in the coding of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	About abortion and prominent flesh caused by women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Abortion is strongly adjusted according to natural causes until it is extinguished and is done with legitimate examination; and some veils are magnified in some women so much that they spread like in men and perceive during coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore it is necessary that you hold the abundance of abortion with your hand or with a hook and insert.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not push too far in the insertion, mainly on the root of the uterus, so that there is no efflux of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then heal with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Moreover, a born flesh is a flesh that grows in the horrifici of the mother until it fills that, and strongly it is said to be similar to the parts of the father according to the semblance of coitus (and for this reason some first call it "malautia caudada"); therefore it is necessary that we insert thus as we insert abortion, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	About the cure of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the cunt of the woman is not perforated, or it is a small passage.
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	The accident is due to a previous bad habit, which was done either for unadjusted flesh or for subtle and thin skin.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is done either in the belly of the mother, or in the sides of it, or in the higher pus of it, or in the lower pus of it, and prohibits from acquiring and from pregnancy, and strengthens the prohibited menses.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the recognition of that is done by examination of the uterus, if the obstacle is apparent, it will be cleared; but if it's not apparent, then you seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstacle is due to subtle and thin skin, it will be cleared by the two lips, then you will touch and break apart that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that which stops above the two lips of the vulva, and then you pause with your fingers indicating from both hands the most inward places.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two lips of the vulva inward so that the subtle and thin skin is broken and the obstacle is cleared.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take a lancet and open the four veins in oil and pause that on the spot, and hold it at home for a day so that the spot does not become inflamed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the skin is thick and dense, then it is necessary that you make an incision with a spatula or a scalpel of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstacle is due to flesh, then suspend it with an onion, and make incisions there.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And here are the medicines that stop the flow of bloody wounds, such as achatia, and dragon's blood, and others, adjusted to the white album of wolf's hoof.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide poultice of soft lead so that the wound does not become consolidated too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days and administer cooling water to the affected area.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some old wise men have fallen into the native birth of other flesh, and then it is necessary that you make incisions according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for aposteme cancers, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the belly and should not be done with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 83.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tailor's and red botcher's that occur in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins inward, so that from those orifices continuous blood flows out; and how ancient hemorrhoids are and are made tailor's.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus about those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tailor's are when they are in the belly of the mother and do not appear to the sense, then in those no iron cure should be made.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the orifice of the mother above which the sentiment is felt, those are the ones that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in a warm bath and then extend the tailor's to the orifices, or with rough cloth, and make incisions there at the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those with the flow of blood from one of the pulverizing incisions, thus with cassia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then steep the soles of the feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that seize in decoction of sumac and of scorched millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster to apply over the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is absorbed, good; and if not, make adhere to two ventilators, and to the nipples their scarifications.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take a lancet and submerge it in juice of colyander or juice of arnagloza or juice of guarriver with five pinches, and make adhere to the spot; and then cure the spot with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But the rough Rog, which is of harsh examination, it is necessary that you make incisions there where it appears to you according to what I have said in the tailor's engagement.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 84.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of accidental injuries in the belly.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of apostemes occur in the belly, such as cancer and aposteme lapident and ulcers and adhubelations and erpetromenons and fistulous hemorrhoids and raguaries and thyl and other apostemes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said about these bad habits and the species of those and their signs, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	I know that you want to dig into this treatise about abscesses, which is the main topic of this book, where I will discuss the apostemes that collect pus, and if you want to know how to perform the operation on a patient with a fever.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you should consider whether the pain of the abscess in the initial stage is acute with percussion and inflammation, and sometimes it grows worse, and if you feel something on that sentiment, then do not make a perforation, but rather cure it by helping to mature the contents until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you should make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline her back on the cushion, adjusting her feet to the partition below the belly, and her thighs are expanded, and place her arms below the knees, and tie something around her to keep it in a convenient position.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife follows on the right side and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the matrix is opened, in the form that will be seen in those causes that will be treated afterwards.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And know when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the radius of the matrix of the woman's womb, and ensure that part of the instrument that enters the womb is not larger than the radius of the womb and the patient's thigh.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the radius of the womb, then you should pause and apply poultices on the texture of the radius of the womb so that it prohibits the entry of the entire instrument into the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And know that you should pause the vertebral column that runs on the instrument from above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebral column until it opens the orifice of the womb.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is smooth and soft, then you should know that you have succeeded in removing the head of the fetus with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the placenta is evacuated, then you should know that you pause in the wound a submerged cotton or oil rose or oil green where there is some stipulation; and place the calcium in the section of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And pause before the womb and above the perineal area a clean cotton submerged in water where there are swollen veins.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it is cured, then two days with a poultice that converges to that which is healthy until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some vegetables are washed with the womb and the wound in such a way that they are crystallized in water and honey, and then in water where there is dissolved root of iris or long aristology, and then it returns to the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deeply ingrained in the womb, then you should know that you are prohibited from curing it with iron, unless you have a cure for that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to handle embryos that are not naturally formed, according to the non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of natural infant development for signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expressing desires below and wants to smell the air, and about that which is joined above her by part, and feels the sentiment of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the sentiment of it on the womb's head, and the second sign is either suspended or pendant from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you see these signs, then you know that the belly of it is comprehended so that the embryo descends lightly and easily when they are above the womb's head, they give it the second sign, and it is freed from those superfluous abundances with good moderation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if that part is not natural and not removable, because when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of it is situated in front of its head and its feet, and its hand is one, or at its foot. or it is situated with its head and hand, or at its belly, and it is strongly converted on the womb's neck, and it seems like the figures of its non-removable parts.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you show the entire figure of those, and which engine is in those so that it is signified for that and it is established on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is situated on the womb's head by natural gravity, and it is vehement against the woman and makes a difficult part, and sometimes its virtue is already debilitated, then make that seizure, or women have it, and evaporate its conjunction with fenugrec cotyledon and olistic humectants.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the measure between the womb's fingers, a small spatula and find that in the second sign, or dry that with its own nail until it correlates what is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Empty the womb of the woman so that she may expel the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Maybe if not expelled, then it is necessary that the woman be treated with a poultice of soft plaster and a poultice of fig tree gum in cinnamon.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And command it to come out, and compress the uterus, so that it be overwhelmed and that stormy humor be expelled with consent; and close its mouth and nostrils for an hour, because the fetus will be forced out almost immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are not fully expelled at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them gradually, facilitating their small pieces.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Maybe if the instrument does not obey, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and place the chair firmly on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall during the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the pieces are not yet turned and the fetus is dead, then cut into them and extract the remains of the fetus or take out the body to the hand of the one who is pulling and extracts that which is equal in size, because it will be forced out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the extraction of the embryo from the pregnant woman's feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is stuck on the pregnant woman's feet, then it is necessary that you push them upwards, and turn the fetus little by little, and try to dislodge it, and take one of its feet and extend it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Maybe when they are stuck inside the thighs, then you command it to come out, and make that extreme effort with consent, because it will be forced out if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forced out in that way which we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little into its natural position, so that it will be easier to deliver later.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of altaea and dissolved gum, and beat everything in the mortar for good percussion, and place it on the womb of the woman, below her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And make that mixture into a warm bath, until you obtain the desired hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the separated parts are cleansed, then make a sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause that on it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you make the sub-fumigation for an hour, then place it on a chair, and make that stormy humor be expelled, and close its mouth, and lift it from there, and press the part down below her belly with gentle compression, because the fetus will soon be forced out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Removal of the fetus from the pregnant woman's knees and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is expelled in this way, then you gently insert its hands little by little; and the woman remains seated on a stool, and her feet are bent downwards, and they are supported on a sheet, and complete their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the belly of the woman little by little, and extract what is left of her feet from the aureliae until it is prepared in the part that is below.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forced out, then take her feet and make those movements vigorously, and press what is on the hypochondria little by little until the fetus can be pulled out to the separated parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert its hands and hold the fetus little by little, and command the woman to push until the fetus is forced out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Removal of the fetus laterally while being held by one of her hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It is gently reduced with the hand of the one who is pulling, maybe if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if walking is not possible, then make her lie on the sheet, and shake her thighs with vigorous concussion, and then administer gentle treatments which you have recommended and soft poultices.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the labor has come, then make her sit on a chair, and place it above the reduction of the hand, and hold the fetus according to its natural position, and make the woman expel and command it to come out so that it is forced out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Removal of the fetus from the expanded womb with its hands and the surface of it is on the back of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	That the midwife holds the hand of the fetus and then revolves it little by little, and that makes it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is thus and you have held it, then stop on the womb of the woman with what we have recommended of oils and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command it to be gently held little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and command it to be inclined over the right thigh, and then command it to be compressed; and make that stormy humor be expelled with consent.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus is turned onto its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the horror of the mother is thus according to this manner, consider it, and then you cut into the second one with your finger until it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if you place a net above the patient's face and neck, then insert that into the belly, so it is not retained and does not die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then apply poultices to the patient's divided parts inside so that it pauses that which covers, and send for the woman who compresses some vegetables, and the sir will forget the worst symptoms, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The departure of twins or the abortion of many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that twin births are rarely natural, and some births are not normal, three or four, but it is strange and bitter to endure; but I know the causes are against nature, and do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count them, already it seems that they are multiplying, a second time, and are separated by a ligament, distinguishing those that enter the umbilical cord of each one of them. Some births are against nature, and thus it is as if it were a natural fetus for a better outcome, and thus some births are for an unnatural outcome, just like we have recommitted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult cases of childbirth and come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you cure them thus as we have recommitted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does to facilitate and subtlety, and delays, and is ingenious according to the entire figure as it is prepared by the engendering mother for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	The memory of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some poultices are formed on the hand in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more ways, and I have already verified that a woman who has had an abortion does not get seven, and another X-shaped poultice causes false measurement of the glorious savors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that is covered because it is in the science of the midwife who strongly holds to that small similar thing, and therefore operates on it as I hold.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not beforehand existed, and you are forced to use opposing operations on me, then I think that you consider whether the woman is of healthy virtue and not among those accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it happens that the woman is placed on her back on the two pillows, and her head is inclined downwards and her thighs are elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the midwife holds that of two parts or is tied to the pillow so that the body of the woman does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you apply to the mother's mouth of it, oil of olive and mucus of flaxseed and of fenugreek and of sesame of those.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife puts her hand on those oils and mucus, and then inserts her hand to facilitate in the mother, and then seeks the hand in the place where the nails are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend onto the pillow head, and then you put the nails in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the armpit, or in the proper places of the ribs, or under the hypochondries.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	More if the descent is onto its feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it happens that you hold the nail with your right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and then insert your hand to facilitate and put the nail in some of those places which we have said, until you reach the boyish cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and put in the application of its another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its rectitude only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus it is worked on the entire part, so that the outcome of it is alleviated thus as it is done in teeth, for the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it happens that in that which is between them, the extension is mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it happens that the midwife puts some of her fingers on oil and inserts those expertly and revolves on that which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the nails are permuted into the place where it was put out; and thus it happens until the entire fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	More if the hand is exhausted beforehand by the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then it happens that the drap is enveloped over that; and then extract that until the entire thing is forgotten, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the hip.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it happens that the swelling occurs on the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Perhaps if the head of the foot is large, or it happens that the contraction occurs in the tissues, or it is in the head of the adjusted water, then it happens that the intervening space between the spinal vertebrae is closed and the head is extracted and the water is expelled, or that which is discovered by an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will be seen in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that is about to come.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, it happens that the foot is of large head by nature: and then it happens that an abscess is formed there, or that one takes out the adjusted water in this way as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and contracted towards the knee, then it should be opened until the humidity that is in the foot is evacuated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Perhaps if it is not complicated, nor does it obstruct the tissues, then you will incise the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the intestines of the belly are apostemated or are in a hydropic state, then it happens that you will perforate them until you correct the humidity that is in them.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	Perhaps if the foot is upon the six inches, then the traction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the matrix is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Perhaps if it is contracted towards the belly and the foot, then it happens that you will extract that which has wrapped around your hand, and that you will open the belly and the foot until what is in them is corrected.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Perhaps if the other members are numb and turned towards the head, then the measuring instrument intervenes in the left hand; perhaps if the mouth of the matrix is open, then insert the hand in the hollow of the liver, and search for that which is near the head, and bring it towards the spinal vertebrae until it reaches the mouth of the matrix, and then intervene with one inch, or two inches, and bring it out from them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the matrix is contracted due to an apostema which adheres to it, then it happens that one should not trouble it further; instead, it happens that one should administer an effusion of humid, greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply emplasters; and follow the patient with waters that mollify and humect.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is on the sixth rib, then if it is possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the foot vivified.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in several places, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it happens that you will not leave any underlying cause of the disease.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of the apostemas caused by the matrix.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if it causes a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer another cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in the belly of whom was born dead, and then upon that same spot another conceived embryo, and then the dead foot was born again.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that at length of time an apostema occurs in the seventh womb; and it swells until it becomes full, and begins to cut short the arm.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to cure him, and I treated him for a long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I paused on him about several causes of emplasters of strong attraction, and extracted one bone from him, and then passed some days, and extracted another bone; and I was too marvelously surprised, as if there were no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead foot.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I understood the plague, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in the seventh thousand disposed milieux, and I had seen it in such a manner for a long time, corrected of one small arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not affirm that it was strange, but rather that in this there is science and help to do with the artificial hand on my own hand for administering cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the foot.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertex in which the matrix is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the stretcher on which the books are bound, to which binding two vertices are in both extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Perhaps the emperor made this vertex so that it might be put more subtly under the stretcher, and it was done either of ebony or of wood from boys.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And it is the width of each wood that has two inches and a margin of each one that has an inch, and the length of each one is a palm and a half; and in the middle place of two woods there are two adjustments of those same woods which were fixed, of which the length is the measure of a palm and a little more, and the width of each one is two inches, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And in this case, you should add two tablets to the mouth of the mother (patient) so that it is opened when you turn the prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form appears more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made from the juice of ivy or of boxwood, according to the similarity of its strength.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	You should apply it to the extremity of the patient, adding thus at times, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and their width is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the patient, then you make the woman sit on a low stool with her feet pendant, opening what is between their thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then place your hand on the instrument thus with tongs in engagement according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the patient's mouth, until it reaches so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way to administer the virtues that the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impelling in which the foot is anointed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of massage in which the big head is constricted:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with tongs that grasp the extremity, thus at times, and some veins are opened thus as tongs according to this form, thus at times, which grasp thus as grasping of rescue in which it is incised and constricted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of gentle massage:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of tongs that grasp the shin in which the head of the foot is constricted:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities in which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when I multiply the species of that and prepare them with artifices, as it is lighter in their operation and more useful to men for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not think that those instruments are so well prepared, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the secondine.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the secondine is retained by the enfantament, then it is necessary that you command the patient to retain their urine, and then make them stir in condition, and strengthen your hand over the patient's mouth and over their nostrils, and if thus it is deformed, well it is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And then, you take a cloth and perforate in the cover a tube and pause on that herb which opens the patient's mouth, thus with calmant and rough and anet and camomile and scented Arabic and Cassia lignea and Santal.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause that over the flame.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then pause a cane of Canary grass in the patient's mouth, and hold that until the vapor comes to the cavity of the patient.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make them stir thus as I have said, and the secondine will be forgotten with velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	You should continue this cure and it is not forgotten, then you command the matrona to submerge her left hand in oil of Sizami or in mucilage of altaea, and then insert that into the jug and scrape there with that secondine, and when that aura is found, then take it out and extend it little by little. If it is annexed in the prison of the patient, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the secondine, extract it little by little according to rectitude so that the patient does not fall into vehement attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Beforehand, I want that the right and left costs are facilitated.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then it is adjusted in the quantity of attraction, because it will obey and evade adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the patient's mouth is constricted, we have recommended the cure with stuttering and medication of the cloth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	You should not forget all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue over that in iteration of abstraction, but I command that what is issued from him to the patient's mouth lies at the thigh of the woman, and then crystallize that in enguent and tetrafarmacon; because it will make it dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	You should know that when they are dissolved, it is of the elevated bad odor at the head, and at the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then I command that they be administered sub-fumigation and convenience according to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	You should know that some of the Ancients already used sub-fumigation of nitrate and of dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument in which the woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menses and of the secondine:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made from glass or from iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	The extremity is placed subtly in the basin and the larger extremity is placed over the focus, and the subtle fumigation is placed over the arms of the focus.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	You hold that within which is consumed by that subtle fumigation and then proceeds to another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the care of the unperforated anus of the infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many infants are born with their anuses not perforated, which have a subtle and obstructed passage.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then the midwife should carefully perforate the anus with that finger; and if not, she should perforate that narrow space, and be careful not to touch the rectum.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place a bandage over that inflamed area with wine and oil; and then take care of that narrow channel until it is healthy.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it may become obstructed, then place a cannula in the tract for many days, and wait until the infant is strong enough to expel.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And then an obstruction of the anus occurs due to consolidation of plague or aposteme; then it is necessary that this consolidation be cut into, and then be cured with what we have said about the care and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the care of the fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part below form a low node and become thick, those which occur near the anus or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that node is ancient and corroded by the acidic white humidity or subtle purulence, and some of these fistulas sometimes penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating ones are recognized by what is ejected from them through the exit and by wind sounds; and some of them use the bad humor of ejection, and it is ejected from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas penetrate into the space penetrating to the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those penetrating ones enter into the joint of the hip and into the notch of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which the penetrating fistula is recognized entering into the anus and not-penetrating, is that you place your finger inside the anus, and you insert a subtle thread of iron or of iron in the fistula when it is not twisted.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if it is twisted, then insert a subtle thread of lead or of horsehair until you feel the thread or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all and there is no progression of the tract for any cause of evacuation or worm or wind, thus as we have said, then you will know that it is non-penetrating, and then you should proceed to the care.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the sign of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it until the place where medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the thread passes through here if it is not twisted into the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the part; and that sometimes it produces pus; and that it does not respond to that medicine, nor is it consolidated with the channel.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the care of them is troublesome and vain effort of foolish doctors about which they boast.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, health is iron-bound and scattered according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been and proceeds.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the bad humor goes between your hands over the two fingers and raises its legs towards them, the hips are inclined to the belly, and then you insert a thread of lead, or of iron if it is in the twisted fistula, until you feel the place where the thread passes through.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if it feels the bad humor around the anus, then it is necessary that you insert your finger inside the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger the thread that has been inserted to discover penetrating, or what you feel between your finger and the anus, then you will know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not bother with it, because it is not in that health, thus as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But sometimes some of them are healthy in some homes where they are tart.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which they are suddenly helped in that is that you ignite subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, thus as it has been preceded, and you insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it penetrates around the anus; and then it will take two or three weeks until you know that all those adjusted carns, fistulized and resembling a feather of a bird's wing, are completely healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then you care for that with calques enveloped in bandages until all those adjusted carns are visible, and then you care for that with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time through another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the tension goes inside and does not penetrate into the thigh where it is in the back of the knee, and between that and the tension which is almost entirely flesh or cartilage, and sometimes a fistula forms on the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you see the drying of the tension, and it is in the fistula until the drying pervades to the place where it affects the extremity of the tension, and for the tension is liberated and freed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then you should clean those festering wounds which are assembled around the canal of painful anguish and do not remove any cause from those wounds.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Maybe the flow of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you are cauterizing those wounds, then the thousand things that are and of the pus lie in the sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because the cautery adjusts well to good habits: so it is adjustment of those adjusted wounds, and removal of the blood from excessive humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then you should cure those wrapped-up ulcers in a bandage or in a truss that goes to the place of the arm, and then cure the plague with a hard, enduring, and consolidating flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines are those which are stimulating and purging; when then it is restored, it is already healed and does not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	Maybe the fistula has already penetrated into the groin of the back and is elongated from the surface of the body, then enter the thigh within the back and investigate in that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you hold the tension and between you and it is almost cartilage or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation on him but rather a path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in him one of three ways: either to cauterize that thus as we have said; or to dry that until you obtain the conquest of his body so that it is possible for you to enter the vessels and the propounded cure; and do not proceed with more drying lest you irritate the contained liquid, and that agrees with the malice of the governing will; and then cure that thus as we have said because strong sir health; or elongate that almost entirely and remove that pus which dries that until towards the back, thus as we have said, either with a pointed instrument or another sharp extremity, and then clean those festering wounds which are in the drying into the one who can make an incrustation; and then strive to do the restoration of all the plague in the drying, and if the horrific pus above is not consolidated, and remove the fistula opened in the part of the back, and it will be lighter for the malice.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished according to this method: it is when you enter the tension into the fistula, and it is in the width of the back around the surface of the body at the codena and in the margin of the back, then take the pointed extremity of a perforating instrument, which is like a needle prepared to open the veins according to this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and enter into that wrapped-up vein of five veins or around those; and then enter the tension into the vein in the fistula until you obtain the conquest of his body.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Maybe it is penetrating into the margin of the back near the teeth, then you extract the vein from that tract thus that you enter the thigh within the back; and you extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when maybe you insert the vein into the flesh, strengthen it until those flesh are inserted which are between the two extremities of the vein and which fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Maybe the horrific fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you are prepared, but not much in the groin, because it is not for you to do that lest you irritate the contained liquid; and then make it enter until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spatula is like this which is bound to the fistula: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not-sharp, so that you do not irritate what is not necessary, thus sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	About the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are thus according to two methods, because either they are between the back resembling thus that it is of carbon, or those are like a fat of rasp.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those are small and large, and the blood flows from them sometimes and it is one, and they are many, and they are outside the back, and in the extremities of him.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Maybe those that are outside the back according to the months of little humidity, from which flow water or a little blood with continuous flow, and thus according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is near the back is that you command the malice to settle and to expel it until the back is dry and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you will feel and suspend an inch above that which you hold in your fingernail, and then cut those veins from their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Perhaps the nails are not held in those for their humidity and softening, then take them with a rough cloth or a cotton pad, and extract them from the tender skin, and then cut them and powder over the burned areas with powdered caustics according to the incision; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal those with another cure until they are healthy.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then sprinkle the patient with a powder in which there is a small amount of absinthium, and wash them with that water which is in the colon and which helps to evacuate more easily when the patient is straining.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	Perhaps the hemorrhoids are in front of the anus, then the cause of them is evacuation, and it is that you take those with your fingernail, or take those with an inch, and cut them, and then heal those with water which we have mentioned until they are healthy.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And to the one who has an incision, it is necessary to administer a suture of them according to this method: take a thread wrapped around and insert it into a needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make it penetrate into the needle in the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the thread around the area below the needle, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in strong structure, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And make them all whole, and leave one of those open and not sewn, so that the superfluity of blood can flow out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then stop above the anus with a cloth infused with rose oil or wax; and place that on the colon and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it until it crusts; and when it falls off, heal those with an ointment or another cure until they are healthy.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Soft medicines applied by excision of a wound or by constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are antiquated and do not have value in that medicine, then it is necessary to root them out with the point of a spatula or with your fingernail until they are humid and held back by the scab, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you will remove those with reason, forcefully, that the first time until much blood flows and they are excavated; and then heal those until they are healthy.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the cure of gout, this is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that gout, this is clear, and it is not so if you do not notice the swelling according to the color of the body resembling a club hand, and it is made in all the body and especially in the parts below the feet and toes, and it ends for those who have that pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary that what is in the circuit of the vein be cut, and held with forceps or an inch, and eradicated from its root; and then heal that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the vein as described in the seventh chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Perhaps a verruca is a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and soft medicines come in the hands of infants.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure of it is that you extend and cut them out, or that you strengthen them with a thread or a hair until they crust.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already eradicated are the inward and outward (growths) with the instrument which you will direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Perhaps a formica is a small, rough, gross fistula on the surface of the body, and when it touches that, it is felt in the likeness of a burning of ants, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure of it is that you take a tube of pea or of nut, and make it strong, and place it over the formica until it contains the circle of the tube around the parts of it; and then revolve your hand with the tube until you cut what is in the circuit of the formica, and place it in the flesh of the patient, and eradicate the formica from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make it with a tube of iron or copper according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part below the tube should be subtle, solid (not perforated), wrapped so that on the said part the absorption of it is abolished and the revolution of it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the formica according to what has been previously said in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauterizing.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of instruments that are administered to give Christ's cross.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some crosses are made of silver or gold or copper foundry or alloy; and some crosses are made of those small and large instruments according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered for the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are fragile or delicate, the crosses of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few Christ's crosses:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cane of the patient from underneath which the bandage is wide according to this method; and it should be at a distance where the bandage is tied in this way sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the pulse below, which is inserted into the buttock, should be subtle (not exposed) like a lion, subtly; and on one side of the thigh there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel is according to the size of the roots and thus a small one.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bandage in which the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin are wrapped, and the width of it should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced for many channels, just as it is revolving; and if the space which is between the channels is very large according to the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude fiber which is of two fibers, or around them; and adjust it on the bandage; and when it is wrapped on the patient, it should be stretched at the head of the cross between two distinct and strongly constricted points, and then cross it on each channel: The quality of crossing on each channel is that you fill the bandage with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be resupinated on his back, and elevate his legs up and place one body part above him or a lantern; and then apply the extremity of the cautery with oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or of similar things; and then insert that into the buttock to facilitate, and then the minister takes the bandage and extracts it with two fingers and seven times with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine as much as is in the Christ's cross; and then remove the Christ's cross and the patient raises his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, hold it as much as you can; and if he sleeps through the whole night, it is more certain in its juvenation.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More so if you cross it on the patients of solution of belly and evacuation of the intestine, then you iterate the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttock there are morbid or putrid abscesses, then the Christ's cross should be subtle and gentle, one of those Christ's crosses with which children are treated.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is convenient to the book, and I have said thus the treatment of those with mother and medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place on which they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why many wounds are made of such things as the blow of a stone, or incision of space, or percussion with a lance, or a fist, or a dagger, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More wounds that are in the places of the body such as a wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I have recommended the treatment of some wounds because it pauses that reasoning and rule about the other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance of the composed will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So I say that when simple head wounds occur and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a blow of a stone or similar, and has already torn the scalp so much and it is a great wound and there are fears about that patient having an apostema cut, then you should remove the cephalic suppuration as soon as possible, and do not delay; and extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there is no prohibitive cause for phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is extracted from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it should be phlebotomy of the opposite part of the wounded area; and beware of the patient's replenishment and of wine and of thick broths.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	More so if from the minute you prohibit some cause, then it should be diminished of the wine and not approached to meat nor to wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And stop on the wound, if it occurs with apostema cut, then inject olive oil or wine in which there is stipptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Most surely it is secure to apply a warm poultice, then pause on the affected area, if it recently happened in the last six hours and the air has not changed that powdery thing which you recommend to apply small.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that powdery thing, then pause on the swollen gums until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Most surely if the wound is large or is from a spacious and similar injury, and not just the lips of it are adjusted for pustules, then adjust them with a suture according to how you recommend for the suture of theirs.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Most surely if the wound has discovered the bone and pen, and it does not retain its own except for a small suspensor, then incise that and apply careful cure to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of cartilage, and command the patient to be moderate in victuals in which there is grossness: caps and form a coil and similar to theirs, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrid flesh in the cartilage and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that rottenness and remove it, and apply careful cure to it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Most surely if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which flows potent blood that can come out, and it is not abscessed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that one unincised, then you incise that with a spatula, or lance it; and if necessary to provoke what we have said does not congregate, then you cauterize until the blood is abscessed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of theirs is lighter; thus you dust over those with that powder, because consolidated there beneath so that the air does not change them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of iris one part, dragon's blood two parts, and cinnamon three parts not extinct; let it be all well trituated and crushed, and of that let the wound be filled, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it be above the aching, and let it be coagulated with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen that beneath with poults and lift it, and do not remove it while it is thus that it is not applied, because it is not eradicated from there by the medicine until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some old woman makes that solo remedy, when it is not to you in presence of iris and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And already this method of operation is suitable for large wounds when it is convenient to pause over them and they are straight, and these recent wounds are with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not intended for the position of this powder, most surely cure those with what we have said, thus you pause over those swollen gums digested, or you pause over those pustules of flour of the ordinary water and honey until they get purification; and apply careful cure to those with another careful cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Most surely if you find a fracture wound in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And you direct the cure of fractures of the head in what is coming.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Most surely if the wound occurs on the neck, then it is not in its difference from medication, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	Most surely if the nerve of the neck is incised or artery, then if it is nerve, it is not in its engendering but that careful cure be avoided with what makes vehement stipulation, thus as zinc and zeal that it is veteran and similar to theirs because no others are like those nerves and contradict that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause over the wound for any total cause of all freshness, because the substance of the nerves is fresh and their continuation is with the brain, which is the pus that comes from all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is that which is cured by light medicines, thus as it is caused by washing with warm water, some veiled infusion in oil of roses or non-roses, and thucia when it is washed with warm water and the other small pains are minimized according to this manner, and swollen gums are humbled.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	Most surely if the wound is large, then administer suture, or sew up the lips of it, and apply careful cure to that with poults until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Most surely if the wound is deep or occurs in the place of putrid matter, then pierce that at the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	Most surely if in the wound an artery is incised and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or dry that, or lance it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke what we have said.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	Most surely if you have incised the vertebrae of the neck or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the cartilage with a suture over the cane of the neck and do not touch that; afterwards equalize that and reduce it to its natural figure, and apply careful strengthening to that with decent structure, and lift that for several days; and apply careful cure to that with swollen gums in which there is stipulation and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already entered the patient's bone to make an impression, then perceive it, and if there is a fragment of bone, extract all that you can from them; and what you do not apprehend, let it remain within so that the plague does not spread, and separate and remove the affected part from the healthy one.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powder over it with the powder that you have recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the plague has made a fistula, then cure it with what is remembered to bring remedy soon to the sick head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the ulcers of the neck or of similar [appearance] which are made between the spine and are made in the scapula or in the ribcage or in the lance or in similar [places].
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of the ribcage or of the lance, and sometimes of its depth, then consider that if the plague has taken possession of the patient's body, then you know that the plague is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the plague is recent in the sick blood, then you pause in it from the first hour powder, and do not strenuous that which is not the retained blood in the depth of it and returns to the heart and revives the patient, rather pause in it an attractive engagement, and deliver those two weighed doses a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the engagement is not present to you, then pause at the orifice of the plague, which collects much from the humidity; and make that the patient sleeps on the plague so that it may run what is in it, adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the plague has passed three days or more and does not affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart nor constriction of wings, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you know that the plague is saved; and then cure it with warm compresses and another curative treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of it is exhausted, and already all time is opened, then you know that a fistula has been made; cure it therefore for the sick head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is by incision of scapula or of ribcage, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure it with what is preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has made an impression on the bone, and its roots are implanted, then you twist the plague and cut to extract those roots, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then let them remain within so that the plague does not spread, for the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plagues occurring in the other members, the juvenation in cure is the juvenation of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that affects the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great ulcers that have taken possession of the intestine or nerves of the intestine, because it is made by their introjection and the suture of them must be more vehement and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of their introjection at the right place immediately, because it becomes thickened and is grossly engrossed, for which the instrument of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And thus the better disruption is middling, because in that it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are convenient for sutures of the other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures communicate with the other plagues, but especially so many are proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So I say that when the plague is small and it has some cause in the intestine for that, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is come to inflammation from the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when it is thus, then you should scald that in this way that you submerge a sponge hot and dripping with humid water alone, or that you cook in water squinant, and cyperum, and spic, and embroques with that in the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some taken possession make it visible in which it has stipulated, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you humidify the intestine with water in which is cooked altaea and malvas, because for that it is alleviated the instrument of it with few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the instrument of it is excused from this cure, then you separate the disruption with a small instrument in which are implanted emollients.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better, when it is probable that there is no infection, and there is no occupation to occupy or delay necessary relief.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, see its shape in it:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp-edged torcha, and the other not-acute, and the subtle extremity, and it should not be in the subtlety of the spatula, unless it becomes obtuse at a few points.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And then when the plague is amplified and goes outside the intestine, then it's necessary that its reduction be according to the form of the natural location, in its own proper place, if it's possible about that, because better is.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Moreover when the disruption is wide, and it's in the lower part of the belly, then it's necessary that you place the patient on their back, and stop their legs besides their head; and if it's in the upper part of the belly, then you stop their head and the chest besides the parts below.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your attention and consideration at all times so that the part where the plague is may be more open than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it's necessary that you administer this in great plagues and in minor plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, pause that which is at your preparation, and make sure that the minister is between your most prepared hands, which hold the entire disruption in its mouth and adjust its lips, and then discover from that to him who knows the suture of some other cause.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts the threads according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and then release the extremity of the disruption from the ring finger, and stretch the thread once, without you putting faith in the two extremities of the codeina, both extremities of the cipher that is below the codeina of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added both extremities of the codeina and both extremities of the cipher, and so form four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then stretch with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some divided parts together, and then add both lips to the plague for decent addition; and then release the grossness of the finger and fix another needle there, and then tie it with double faith as if it were the first needle; and do not cease from doing that if it is necessary among the needles until you complete all the contraction of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And thus the minor needles are between roughness and subtlety, because the subtle needles hardly ever incidentally touch the flesh; and the large ones are of difficult entry into the codeina, and therefore it's necessary that they be minor in subtlety and grossness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it's not necessary that the needle be fixed in both extremities of the codeina nearby, so that the flesh is not incidentally touched and that the plague does not open before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And there are no prolonged sutures because the plague should not be prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not let the patient deviate from their proper dormier; and pause over the suture with pulverized expanses of entire parts, which hold the extremities of the needles; and release them until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of suture with needles in this way are more convenient in small plagues, because they have need of a suture of one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Moreover the second suture is communal: and it's that you administer a suture of the four extremities, of the codeina and both extremities of the cipher, in one way, with a needle in which faith is enveloped in subtlety and grossness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle to that same part of which it began, so that the faith retracts from the most sublime part to the plague, so that the suture is according to the suture of a taut thread in which the threads are strongly tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the grossness of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in this suture I cured the plague that had afflicted a man in his belly, which had been plagued by a cut, and it was the disruption of the major plague of one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the intestine of the middle place, and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I cured it after the intestine had been outside the plague for 23 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured it and it was healed; and then I visited for many years, and it was converted into its proper dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors have judged that it is not a healthy place; and by miraculous focal point, because you do not cure anything that has been wounded, because it was in a place where the wound was not treated or any medicine, but rather the plague was hidden for many days, and continually ablution with warm water inside, so that it may be healthy.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Perhaps you direct two special types of proper suturing according to the narration of Pareula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with suturing of the cord, and you insert a needle from the front part to the back part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates into the cord and in that moment it goes straight according to rectitude and in the length of the whole body, and it reaches the extremity of the ciphac where you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate from one extremity to the other, from the back part to the front part, in the other extremity of the miyat.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another way in that same extremity of the miyat from the front part to the back part; and it reaches the extremity of the ciphac which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate from one extremity to the other, from the back part to the front part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate again in that same penetration, which you do by penetrating into the ciphac in the extremity of the mirror, which is inside, so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this same side and sew up that extremity which is of the ciphac on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the cord that penetrated, and then return it to its place in the cord, and so the extremity of the ciphac which is on the other side is in this same extremity of the mirror; and withdraw it from the cord which belongs to it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make one way and another, and make one way returning to another way until you collect all that is before, according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you collect a suturing of pellicles in which you collect the skin, and thus you collect the ciphac one way from the part of the extremity of the cord, and that you leave another way until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Perhaps the second special type of proper suturing that Gualia recommends, and this is concerning the serum of it and for its recommendation, it is that you collect according to similarity in which some doctors collect it, and thus they add all part to its corresponding part convenient by nature; and they apply the extremity of another to the mirror's extremity to the other extremity, and that is done according to what you have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	That you fix the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own part from the front, and make it penetrate to the back part in that sole, and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and then return the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in two extremities of the ciphac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then return those circles, and make penetrate certain ones from the back part to the front part in two extremities of the mirror other than those that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suturing is better than the common ligature, and it is a suturing of which I previously mentioned remembering.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the serum of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And perhaps the doctors said that a suturing of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert in these a certain fidelity, and begin with an introduction of needle from what is yours, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing of those who sew up the intestines together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when disruption is in a middle location of the belly, then the suturing of it is more difficult than in other locations of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	Perhaps the judgment of medical treatment of plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which cause is because when you consider the recent plague similar to the holy blood that it alters, and reduces the intestine and collects it and adapts it decently, then pause over that incarnative powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over those doctors who are present until they make a hard and strong remedy, and consolidate ciphac and mirror; and then cure it thus as is the cure of the other plagues until it is healthy.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	Perhaps if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that so much, because it begins to take a long time, and ablute many times a day, thus as you and teach, until it is healthy, because you do not need other medical treatment in many dispositional motives when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Perhaps if you fear that the plague communicates with the principal members, then it is necessary that you submerge the woolen thread in oil of tempered quality, or in rose oil, and pause it in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave the essences.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, because many empty veins have ended there, then crystallize that bitter medicine with a sharp pointed instrument, and it will be more effective if the perforation is made in the intestine and it makes an penetrating exit into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You know that the one that is of the large intestine is to remove more easily than the one that is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine which is called "gizzard" does not receive healing of a wound that falls into it from everywhere; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and due to its magnitude, and due to the subtlety of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Perhaps what proceeds from the wound is the fabric, and you will achieve that remedy, reduce it according to your correct method in which you reduce the intestines in a gathered way.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Perhaps it has passed to the space and already becomes green or black, then when you stretch out that faithful hand over the area that is denied of it, in order to bring forth flows of blood, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then you will find another ligament, and place two extremities of the faithful hand pending on the part below the wound, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it from the fixation of the fabric and emission of the arm from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some homes, because thus you saw that which was wounded in the hollow belly with percussion of a lance and it was the wound of the right part of the stomach, and the wound was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you will observe the cure of it, because it was not confused in its healing, perhaps it continues to make subtle that which is focused on sanitizing and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you will see that the area is consolidated, then place it on the patient who has suffered an evil accident in the hollow belly; and do not suffer any more for that evil accident and remain in their many virtuous and beneficial habits, and then enter into a bath and it is exercised in its daily routines.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And I will describe certain experimented remedies that when an injury occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take fragments of large caps; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place a fragment of those that have the open mouth over the two lips of the wound; thus when you take hold of them and stretch their mouth, you will remove the cap of it, because they adhere and do not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another fragment next to the first one, and do not cease from making fragments until you have made all of them according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and close the wound; and remain with those attached caps in the intestine until the intestine is sanitized; and do not harm the patient with any further annoyance.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is subtly tied with faithful thread which is made from the intestine of a beast annexed to it, because it is mixed in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of intestine, and it is not very descarnated, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of the intestine, enveloping, and then insert that thread into needles and close it around the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suture with fragments is not anything but according to the way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Perhaps the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not anything but subtlety, and there is no healing of it at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every wound and aposteme when they become evil and ancient, it is made an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and gets worse over time and does not heal, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called fistula and we call it that azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is a nodulation of a feutrada, hard, white matter which does not cause pain and which is conquered thus as it is conquered by the penalty of ausel; and for this reason it is called a certain rizatz, that is penalty.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some humid homes, which gets worse; and for this humidity is removed at certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some evacuated this humidity are many, and it is few, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already said in the division, then when you discuss the wounds, that every ulcer that is not healed nor is in the naked flesh, is not anything but for one of nine causes: either because of few blood in the body; or because of malice in it; or because between it and the lips is hard carn prohibiting nativity of carn; or because it is of many legacies; or because that ulcer in itself meets and the matter that is in its transmission is of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient in its cure; or when corruption falls in the region, and it is pestilence; or because of the property of the region thus as it ends in Saragossa, where it is made difficult digestion of the evils, and it is delayed in that healing of aposteme by nature; or because there are one bone, or many osses.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have shown you all those causes, and the signs of those and the cure of their loves in medicine in division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I will teach you how to know the cure of fistula, which is done by way of operation in hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because some of them are fistulas that penetrate to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and of these it is said to give proximity to the principal member and similarity.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore those of these fistulas that are according to this manner are among the difficult-to-heal diseases, and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is trouble and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas at a depth that does not allow to reach those places that I said, and you hope and trust in its cure, and want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with fire, and if the fistula goes straight, and you acquire it in hand.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead probe, because lead follows the levity of the sick body and is alleviated and curved away from the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has very horrible motions, it is not possible for you to signify on it with your hand.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then crystallize the horrific orifice for its horrific orifices, because the humidity through which you crystallize it goes away from the other horrific orifices and corrects their course.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and it is the conquest of the long or proximate fistula, or it is a fistula with many horrific orifices and this is above all your strength, in your introspection, in which you introspect the patient, and the invention of the pain goes away from your compression on the hand, and similarly to the significations and accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And since you have stated above all those causes in a true station, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dissect the fistula according to what has been said about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the will and similarly, and cure it entirely so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of distant profundity, and it is straight, then you should cut that into the preceding part as much as possible, and entirely remove all its corrupt flesh; and then administer wrapped medicines acutely, and introduce them into the conquest of the fistula, which has been grasped with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that until some of the veins are inserted so that the acute medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the conquest of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with juices that engender healthy flesh until it may be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is verified by you, then you should inquire into it and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and decay, then you should root out that entirely so that the corruption may be stopped totally; and then cure it with something that will encarnate it so that it may be sanctified.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healthy and gives pain thus as it was doing, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and then you should discover above it secondly and exquisitely make the reason of it and the mundification of it with the last strong fortification, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the distant profundity of the body, which has not been achieved, and then you should not engender anything but leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract it, then you should extract it with subtle forceps that are convenient for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you should exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and of those do not leave any cause in your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you have made opposition to any cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then you should dissect those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and extract the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you have not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause over the plague that you will purge the plague there, and let it enter so that it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague being consolidated, and constrict the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having doubts, pause over the submerged bone above the olive oil, or the submerged bone in Egyptian anguents, or in the alcove of the green vertebrae, because when you will purify those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and those attractions are alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone thus with the bone of the chamber or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted is the face of it as much as possible, then cut out that badness so that it is separated from the black corruption, and then restore the plague.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which is corrupted is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and to incise all the way into the place where the corruption has penetrated, and then cure it so that it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you endeavor to put someone at their thigh so that they pause there and assist and support your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	I have seen a young man of about thirty years, to whom pain occurred in his thigh, and from the affected parts a bad matter is spread throughout the body until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of great abscess, and I do not find an external cause for it.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I found that the time was extended for the error of the doctors until the abscess was hidden, and I corrected the putrid matter, and its cure was paused until the thigh was fistulated, and the joints were in the morbid orifices which all received purulence and the humidities of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors were consulted for about two years, and I did not find any of them who knew the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the thigh of that man and the matters that were corrupting it from those orifices for a great body; and already the body of that man was completely stabilized and the color of it was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices and penetrated the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed and examined all the orifices and thoroughly searched for those penetrating to their depth in all parts of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and incised over one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, and I extracted that corrupted thing, and it was already decayed and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupted a part of the thigh until it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I cleared away what was discovered by me and prepared the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I judged that it was not in the bone itself but that corruption which I had abscessed and cleared away, and I had already demolished.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the plague with medicine that consolidates for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily on the primary discovery, and I continued to find corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I cleared away what appeared to me as that corruption, and then I was forced to do the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered about the other vein and did not cease to incise the small bone little by little particularly and performed the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and that extracted marrow from it, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated gradually and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and its section except for the disposition of its fragility and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it accelerates at all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncopes badly.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is healthy through entire healing, and nothing is in place of hard carnal flesh; and the disposition of it was good in its sieve-like body and returned its virtue to it; and it was converted into its dispositions and did not make it contrary in ambulation nor did harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is an eminent bone in place of the body already weakened, then you should take that second joint according to this method: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command it to extend itself in its own; and pause that ligament of wool which is thicker than the primary ligament; and then you place it above the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that it attracts the flesh to the parts beneath, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to saw, so that the saw does not lead the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause or stop the table from touching the patient's body decently, because when you do this it is not prohibited to avoid the corrupted flesh that decays.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover the small corrupted area little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the senses, and strengthen the closure of the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, although it is one continued part in the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you discover the entire flesh of all parts; and then stop the table from underneath, and then cover that of the first part where the corruption enters until the closure of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the closure according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and cover the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in the vein.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is very difficult; however, cover so that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and remove it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and also with caution lest it be rectified to you, when it does not make you contrary veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know what the incisions and closures are to incise these bones, according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you prepare for all kinds of operations and convenient instruments for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation depends on you regarding the type of instrument which you need; when you are great study and long and knowledgeable about the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, because then you have them for your measures that are convenient to all instruments for all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will find in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with, as I have simplified them, and those that proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of closure:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another closure:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another closure: (no change, same translation)
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of a large closure:
Forma de ray:	Form of a radius:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Be the head of this radius according to the form of the head of a star-shaped claw, and the points of it are according to the form of the points of a steadfast instrument.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable unless you have that instrument confected with the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another closure made decently: it is made with an arched curve of the foot above and the acuity of iron, and the member of the foot below is made decently.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which it has been concaved:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a lancet:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor with which you incise the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a radius, and the extremity of it is like a closure, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a radius which is suitable for a ratio of that which is perforated through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and of sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and similarly you cover all the causes that we have said about razors and incisors and closures.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision extremities and of the closure of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with a cure of those medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption becomes so bad that it deviates from the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it covers that you incise that member until it reaches the corrupted area, so that the evil may evacuate through death or malice which is greater defilement of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that one to which it happens, is that the member becomes black until it is understood that fire has already consumed it, or it withers away near the blackness until the withering reaches that member and takes all the body; and thus you will know the incision of that one.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if it is a cause of corruption from venomous causes, such as the sting of a scorpion or of a viper or of a rattlesnake and of similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not leave space for the corruption to spread to the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should incise that at the root of the forearm, and do not leave space for the corruption to spread so that it takes hold in the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you want to evacuate it, then incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond and surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for cure is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, it happens to the foot when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you should incise that up to one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold on the edge of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it reaches into the ankle, then you should incise the leg up to the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the ankle, then in that case it is not a cure but rather a dismissal, and leaving the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising the limb or of sawing it is that you stretch a ligament in the part below where you want to incise, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament upwards; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments in this way until all the flesh is discovered; and then it is incised or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And take care that it is placed far from the edge of all parts so that it does not touch the area, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and aposteme is cautious.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if there is a flow of blood when operating, then you should cauterize the area carefully, or stop the bleeding with some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the wounded limb with a ligament at a convenient point, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his sick foot, this kind of accident which you and I have recommended, which is because the black humour in the sick foot was assembled with combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption happens primarily in the sick toe until it reaches the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for such pus that he wants to cure the limb with the vehemence of that which removes pain and discomfort, and incises that foot up to the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, that same corruption happened in the finger of my hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and I had to perform a repetition of that superfetation on the hand of my medicines, then the mundification of the body; and it does not repeat the superfetation and begins to move to the other finger until it reaches the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they asked me to incise the hand of that, and I did not want to do anything expecting a repetition of that superfetation, and perhaps it would have been better to have avoided the incision of the hand of death, because the virtue of the patient was on the point of collapse.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it happened to me that that man prepared and incised his entire hand, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration except to be an aid regarding what is said about this disease, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is operated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the care of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus flows out, and the area around which it was like a vessel, and the channel that is above it like a subtle drain, and it does not reach the underlying corruption, and it does not impinge on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But perhaps if the space is prolonged until the corruption penetrates into certain members, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you incise the entire channel in this way as it is revolved, and mainly when it is subtily drained and made to flow like a drain, and confirms that it does not adhere to the area because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you think that the channel adheres and that corruption has not been achieved by underlying consequence, and in the channel there has been a passage of carrion, then you should cure it with a cleansing.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that I consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm which you have of fetid odor, then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and vinegar and zinc, receiving equal parts, and adjust them in a vessel, and apply them over the fire until the medicine becomes red and reaches the specific of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you take the water that is necessary and dissolve it in a warm liquid and honey; and cleanse the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of the intestine, and leave the medicine in it for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract that liquid with precision; and make it for several days until the sinus is purified and the putridity is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some vegetables are cleansed with warm water of cinder, when you do not have this medication present; and it is that you take the cinder of vitriol, and put it over the water; and then take that and cleanse it in her until you confirm that the sinus is cleared at that time.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance to the Egyptian medication or the water of cinder, then cleanse it with warm water and honey mixed with ziniar trissat, and cleanse it with warm water and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the warm water makes the sinus adhere, and it increases when the warm water has overflowed with moisture and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you make that liquid with some vegetables and you confirm that the sinus is already cleared, then cleanse it with water that makes the flesh of the body soft.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take the juice of dyafinicon and dissolve it in oil of rozat and warm stipptic; or that you cleanse with some medicines and other juices that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on juices.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is straitened in which the tube of the syringe is not received, then you amplify that liquid by adding a little ferrum petit at a time, and pause in the wrapped calyx covered with Egyptian juice or basilicon juice until it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of the liquid to the suture and leave the quantity in which the syringe injects its additions.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of the intestine where the arm is elevated to the upper parts, then dry it in the lower place where it is in the body so that the arm may flow until below, because when the arm is constricted at the entrance of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered in the body.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus until the lower place of the bone according to your wishes, then you should prepare the member with preparation so that the arm may flow more easily according to what is apparent to you and so that no cause of the arm is retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are placed conveniently over the sinus, according to what you want to extend those over the cloth of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth is of such great quantity that it makes communication with all the sinus; and then insert the forks in the right orifice of the sinus through an ample tube, a little; and then extend over another cloth of linen with the Egyptian juices according to the quantity of the tube, and pause it there for a long position of the orifice of the sinus so that the flow of the arm is alleviated and does not obstruct the great cloth except for some days, one vegetable.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	That which is over the orifice of the sinus, which remains there for a whole hour so that it flows correctly into the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so you know if the liquid that flows from the arm is a lot or a little, whether it is digested or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And then you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the matter that is poured over the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or takes proper adhesion, then you may detach it on the third day, and when you detach the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the juice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has a subtle and fine virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because the health of the body is proper, because some homes are in those which slow down the generation of flesh in the aforementioned plagues, and of those which are made contrary to it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus for many days has an indigested arm, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried also like juice of dyafinicon, when it is in an adjusted superfluous addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last medicine which is curative, is that you take juice of dyafinicon and dissolve it in oil of rozat, and put it on the arm with an antique vessel in its substance, and then confirm that liquid, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And thus it is similar in that action, when there is no arm, juice of dyafinicon, honey which is cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or take mirra and aloen and grind them, and sprinkle all over the honey which is under the focus, and then spread that liquid over the cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; and thus spread that liquid over the honey which has been cooked until it is thickened, and sprinkle over the cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And certain evacuations are administered in the long Aristological method and celestial roots (and it is celestial roots) and farina of errors and centaurea, and use of those simple or adjusted, trituration and pulverization on the honey that has been recommended; and its juice.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the praecordium of the patient, and already there is an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you will treat with a fistular cure, as it is said below.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of painful and worn-out nails and of incised fingers added to the section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Painful nails are an aposteme which often arises from the nail of the hand or foot, and it often occurs in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its treatment is less attended to, or it becomes apostematous from the post-aposteme caution, or it becomes corrupted, and it throws a branch within that corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all of it, and it perverts its corruption to the bone within, so that it is at the fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger is affected, and the color of it is darkened.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And then when you have that water which we have spoken of in the division and it does not conduce to your cure, then it is necessary that you remove all the superfluousness that has grown from the nail and return to cauterize the wound with that water, because a cautery made in this way is very beneficial.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Moreover if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, and the additions of the nail are already comprehending the flesh in the divided parts, and they begin to sting and pierce that, then it is necessary that you pause subtly under the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and you press upon it and incise that flesh to facilitate, and you put on what remains of the flesh of the corrosive medicines burning within so that it may be totally removed; and you return to cure that wounded area until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	Moreover if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone itself and extract it, for no time will it be healed while it is in the corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption are in the finger, then you incise it in one of the nodes according to the premise of its reminiscence, and you return to cure it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	Moreover if the nail has received percussion or attrition, and has become painful with vehement pain, then it is necessary that you begin to soften the patient, and return to cut the nail with a spatula-like instrument with a transverse section above the joint, and beware that the section does not penetrate into the flesh which is under the nail, lest you cause the patient vehement pain, and it will be the cause of the superfluous nativity of the adjusted flesh in the location; and return to treat that location with water that alleviates the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Moreover, it is adjusted, which is born in the marrow of some men, for they are entirely fleshy, and entirely in their bones, or entirely in their nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the nativity of them in certain nodes of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Moreover, that which is born in certain nodes of the finger does not become evil, and that which is born in the joints is entirely bad.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are fleshy growths, the section is easier, and it is necessary that you incise that with a broad spatula-like instrument.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Moreover, of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its abscession.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Moreover, in that which is born on the fingers with nodes, it is necessary that you incise at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and return to close with one of those convenient serrations adapted to that, and return to cure it until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Moreover, consolidation occurs which adheres to the fingers among the evacuated joints or by nativity of the man who is thus, or by consolidation of the wound or by combustion of fire, or by semblance, therefore it is necessary that you section that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And return to pause between the drapes of the inflamed joints with rose oil so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them among themselves, or pause among them a thin layer of lead until it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in certain fingers at the palm, then you section that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapts to the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of veins, they are variable.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are variable, and they are enveloped by gross superfluous melancholic fluids which come from the members of the body, and the greatest advent occurs in their hollows, and they are augmented in the hollows of the wanderers and laborers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer purging of the body from black bile by evacuating strongly, and also bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of their iron instruments is according to two methods: one is that they should be inserted and the black blood should be attracted, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and all the blood should be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning of it is according to this method: start by introducing the leg in hot water so that the thick blood is resolved, which is foul-smelling from the leg, and then stretch the leg of the patient towards the upper part of the thigh into a band, and then section the vein in one place, or two, or three with ample sectioning, and then raise the black blood to the highest part of the thigh above the knee, and from there down, until the quantity of blood that you want is evacuated, and which will tolerate the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then leave it there, and command him to abstain from food that generates black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and it is noticed to be beneficial to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them is according to this method: you raise the patient's leg, if there are many pimples on it, and then place it in a bath and introduce the leg into hot water until it becomes red and the veins become exuberant; or it should be exercised with strong exercise, if a bath is not present at your location, until the member becomes warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then section the cord at the right of the vein for sectioning in the groin or in the back of the patient's knee, or at the lowest part of the patient's ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then uncover the cord with an incision and excavate the vein from all parts until it appears to the sense, and it is necessary for the patient's appearance, which sometimes declines into blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, when you evacuate from the cord, you will see that white thing which is a vein.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place it below the vein until it is elevated and removed from the cord, and suspend it in an incision or open wound.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then section another section in that section for three fingers, and then excavate the cord from the part below the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise it and insert it into the back section of the ankle, and then extract it and raise it until it is evacuated through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do it until you extract it from the section that is above or outside of all the sections, until everything is evacuated; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then introduce a strong double-edged needle and tie it up and extract it, or introduce it below the vein and rotate your hand to all parts until it is grasped.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate it much and it will come back over the patient through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when everything is evacuated, then pause over the place of the wounded area submerged in wine and oil rose and oil not-rose, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the life is contrary and has twisted around which it is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should confess about that to the whole part of twisting of it and the places of its envelopment, and then suspend it in an incision until it elevates everything.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your sectioning that you do not insert the vein and that you do not harm it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Method of inserting into the place where life is sectioned:
Forma de unci orp:	Method of an incision or wound:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to be inserted hastily like that into the incision or wound, nor is it of acute extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would insert the vein by its subtlety; having excess in superfluous grossness like that which we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the veins of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs on hot lands, just like in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India with little fertility, where there are no herbs or plants.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is generated strongly in other places of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the condition of it is of putrefaction that you see below the cord, just like venomous snakes and worms and scorpions and worms generating between the cord and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the suspicion of the advent of it is of this vein that causes inflammation vehemently in the leg; and then the place becomes blistered; and then the vein starts to issue from the place of that blistering, which seems to be rooted like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then it appears from there to the extremity, then cover it with a piece of lead weighing one dram, or two drams, and place that suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And many times, with the eyes of the alcuna cause in the foreparts, wrap it in lead and apply that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the motion is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap the remaining; and do not insert that with too much force until it is fully settled, because if you insert it with force, it becomes counterproductive and enters into the flesh, causing apostema and putridity in the area and ulceration badly.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and be extracted little by little, until it is fully removed from the back of it and no remaining cause stays in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it is extracted in some men who are in their longitude of 5 palms and of toes, and already I have received one of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray into the channel of it and perforate that long channel in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medications; and then cure it for the cure of apostemas.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And in this vein some times there are many ramps, and it worsens when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it goes to the most horrific orrificis, and it is extracted from some horrific orrificic ramp.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus cure it in this way as we have said in the division and with that which is written above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	About the generation of worms under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some land as our bovine disease because many times it comes from the oxen and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and it goes throughout the whole body, destroying and corrupting, and it shows its sentiment by disarticulating the skin and eyes from member to member until it dismembers the skin and eyes.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through the putrefaction of certain humors, thus causing worms and serpents and lumbrics and ascarids to appear in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then it strongly affects it and destroys the brain, and that is why many times it comes.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And thus when you want to cure it and extract it, then it cannot be done unless you have the ambulation and application of it to the sentiment, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with ligament and constriction, and then you dry above it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not come out, then you apply cautery with fire on the area until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it in the place where it corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Perhaps it has reached the head because of the brain, then strengthen above the eyebrow with a strong structure, and then dry above it, and extract it; and it is necessary that the bad humor use the mondification of the entire body in medications evacuating putrid bad humors, and guard against the generation of putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	About the section on nafrid disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is named in our land as nafrid, and it is the pain that appears in certain members, and then it spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that according to what I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a town, and I discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after I had been there for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away thus as it went down from this to that, but more lightly than it should be, thus as if it was silver I saw when it corroded from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I placed it in the pain of that place and fixed it in the muscle, and then I stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I corrected it in the other body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to myself that it revolve throughout the entire body according to what I had seen; and I was very marvelled at the permutation of it and at the velocity of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my own veins according to that manner, however I have seen many of those which cause pain to be permuted from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it in the veins thus as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was that unless it was because the woman was old, one of dry body and discovered veins, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that permutated ventosity.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that you do not appear to be retrograde in those who are delicate and have a humid constitution with weakened veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure them, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you as we have said, then you strengthen over that and leave it for a long time and settle it with a gentle heat, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Perhaps you do not always have the same ties to them, then you cure that which is excessive in the body and what expels bad humors, and clean those putrid and filthy ulcers and serpent-like sores.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to species, and according to the places in the body where they occur, because their diversity is that of those with large points, and small ones, and concave, and rough, so they are solid; and of those with three angles, and of those which have tongues; and of those which have astellas (possibly "astellas" means "stars" or "stellate tips").
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the wounds in which they occur is according to two manners: because the members or principal members are concave, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, and bladder, and their likenesses; and therefore when you cut into one of these members and appear to sense death, which cause you to recommend a prompt cure, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that arrow from those in which death sits in the major dispositions, and when you do not appear to have those evil symptoms, and the arrow is not embedded in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the symptoms of the brain is when you cut into the arrow, and it passes through the bone, and it is situated on the crown of the head, because it causes vehement headache, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the veins, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasms and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and the vein is abscessed and the voice is destroyed, and it is situated on the place of the plague with white humid blisters resembling pustules, and it appears to be affected by the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you appear to have these symptoms, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Perhaps the symptoms of the arrow when it cuts into the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and it seems as if it were fixed in a hard cause, and not a vain cause; and therefore the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and it runs with the black plague, and it is a coldness of the extremities, and sweating freely, and syncopy; and therefore you know that death descends from all these signs.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms when the arrow has affected the lung are expectoration of bloody spumous matter from the plague, and the veins that are near the colon become apostematous, and the color of the patient's skin is changed, and they exhale a great deal of spirit, and demand attraction of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow cuts into the peritoneum which is in the abdomen, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes a great deal of vehement pain and anxiety, and does not move at all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow cuts into the stomach, then it is likely that you will have a plague of vomiting and some indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow cuts into the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, you will have some ulceration of the plague, or the web, or hernia which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure of extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow cuts into the bladder, and it is situated before the urine, and it processes some cause in the parts before, and therefore there is pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Perhaps the other members are also like the face, the neck, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the adjacent ones, and the vertebrae of the back, and the furcula, and the hip, and their likenesses among the members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not touch a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these arrows, so that they signify to you about the cure that is suitable for it.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is, because in one case the arrow was cut into the lacrimal duct of the vein of the eye, and I extracted it from the other part, leaving the grayness of the aurelia of the eye, and it is healthy, and does not affect the eye's functioning.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew whose eye was cut into the grayness of his own vein, behind the eyelid, and the arrow was hidden and could not be reached except by a small extremity that adhered to the Jew's fist, and it was a great arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with an iron point on which there were no aureliae.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	It is the judge, and do not neglect it in the sight of a bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	He extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had fallen into the gutter, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it was that which he had swallowed; and then you inserted it between two fingers, and it was submerged in the gutter of his body; and then you subtly felt around there, and then you extracted it, and it healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	He extracted another arrow from a man whose body had fallen into his own belly, and you thought he would die from it; and therefore, since he passed thirty days without any change in his condition, you inserted your fingers around the arrow and turned it around, and it healed, and do not neglect it due to bad accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I saw a man in whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated over him, and since he had suffered for about seven years, I extracted the arrow from the root of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman in whom an arrow had fallen into her belly, and the wound was consolidated inside her, and it did not change in her condition, and the woman did not have any movement in some of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man in whom an arrow had fallen into his face and the wound was consolidated, and you removed the arrow, not feeling much pain, and many signs appeared to be like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	He extracted the arrow from the man, one of the king's princes, which had fallen into his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called for the cure of his wound caused by the falling of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you felt the wound of the arrow very strongly; and then you inquired about it with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; but I felt it at the point below the right ear, and then you suspected that this point was due to the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster to the place where I had extracted with attractive and digestive powers, trusting in myself that the place would be cleansed so that it appears to me as the place of the arrow, so that it succeeds over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not neglect the significant place of the accident where the arrow had reached that place; and you continued to apply the plaster over it for many days without any accident; and the wound was consolidated meanwhile, and I removed the bad humor from the excretion of his body within many days until one day I felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized it as my own.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you applied a sharp corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it became open, and I touched it with my finger, and felt the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the skin.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjusted it in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and I took time for myself about that for the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then since the wound became amplified, and it was possible for me to introduce the forceps into it, and I remained there, and did not obey the judgment, because you did not cease to subtly ingeniate and engineer about that in many ways of art, until one day began on that in many ways of art, pending to take it out with forceps skillfully made, according to what will be seen at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and you restored it and the wound was consolidated, and it healed entirely, and I did not find any fault in it for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And you recommend to yourself the quality of extracting some arrows because you paused on that rule and significance about what I have not said, since the parts of this art and its definitions are not understood in narration nor do they comprehend it freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisans knew how to compare few things about many; and I know what is present about what is absent; and they found a new operation and new instrument of descent from the external causes of the art when they happen.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore you say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they entered; or by contrast with the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is forgotten by the place where it entered, or it is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy place, and it is attracted and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the judgment of the hour in which it falls, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes healthy, and its attraction and exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is fixed in the bone and does not obey your judgment, then leave it for some days and try to attract it with motion on any day, and then it will be forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your own judgment, then beware that you do not perforate the circuit of the sage in that bone of the entire affected part, so that the subtle travel within does not amplify the sage, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the sage is fixed in the bone of the head and has proceeded to one of the vents of the brain, and appears in the patient's accidents which you have and tell, then abstain from the extraction of the sage and let it be until the sight can be equalized; for if the sage pervades the ciphalic, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the sage is not fixed but only in the body of the bone, and does not pass into the ciphalic, and the patient remains for some days, and no accident occurs due to any of those causes, then engage in the attraction of the sage and in the attraction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps it is not fixed and does not obey your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the sage as we have recommended, and then cure the area until it is healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Perhaps the sage is accumulated in the area of the body, and it is accumulated from the sentiment, then you inquire into that accumulation, and if you feel it, then attract it with certain instruments which are convenient for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you do not operate on it due to the constriction of the plague and the length of the pression, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then feel upon the plague until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the sage.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the aurelia which holds it, then you deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from the entire affected part to the very end that you can do; and operate upon that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelia and in twisting of those until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the sage in any location where it is, then use a torque of your hand with forceps on all affected parts until it makes it obey; and subtly use a subtle subtlety so that the sage is not torn and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on it at your time, then leave it for some days until the parts that are in its circuit can be restored, and then iterate upon it because then it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Perhaps you have made a contrary flow of blood, then administer what we have said about cure in the seventh chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer skill in all manner possible for the evasion of the sage; and make it facilitated and tranquilized and delayed and firmified as you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus you make counter to the sage so that the patient is according to the figure according to which they must remove the encumbrance of the sage from it, because it is perhaps more juvenile.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Perhaps if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Perhaps the sages that are forgotten by the contrary of another affected part, or which has already proceeded to some part outside, or has made the extrication of the sage by sentiment of the part above the codena propdan and times that eminent; then you section upon that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then attract it, because it is made lighter to the judgment.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Perhaps it is retained in the bone, then twist the lame according to contrarity until the sage takes root in the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for some days, and then iterate upon it until you find what is sought.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the foundation of the sage is in that, then implant it in the body.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Perhaps if the foundation is fallen and you want to administer impulse, then introduce and into that, if it is dull, instrument concert with the cavity of the body in the case of the sage and then implant it in the body.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Perhaps if the sage is concave, then implant it in the instrument strongly inserted into that, because the sage is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the sage is intoxicated, then beware that you concave all the flesh in which it is true, if it is possible for you, and then cure it with what is convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the sage is located in the feet, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribs, and it is near so that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to section upon that, then section upon that and guard yourself from incision of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then heal the plague if it is indigent, and cure it until it is healthy.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps which are attracted to the sages:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	If the extremities of their body are like a bird's beak which are affected with cold humors when they take hold of the arrow for fear of not releasing it.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are affected special motes, large, few and smaller, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its slight weakness, and of the amplitude of the plague, and of its constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of impulse with a concave shape of this extremity that is conquered thus with the penalty of a bird's beak so that it alleviates the instrument of the arrow in it, and impulse of that cord.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of impulse of a cord-like extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	thus with a ray so that it alleviates the instrument in it through the concave arrow and it is impelled at that moment.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of the phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy of those that customarily run to be phlebotomized thus. of those that are in the head, 16. it is two pulsating veins that are near the ears, they say alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are under the upper lip; and two veins that are under the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and it is two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	More, the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are thus. because of those, one is a cephalic, and it descends to the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is a cord-like vein, and it is a minor vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of the whole body", and the basilica is a vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and is named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and veins of the arm, and it is placed above the focus, and it is that one which is phlebotomized, and it is that one which appears above the thumb for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein which is between the auricular finger and the smaller finger, and so in the two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is beneath the curvature of the knee of the wild lettuce; and the second is sophena, and its place is beneath the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is beneath the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhal, ancient and migrating, and sahafti, and ulcerous evils of the bad old head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding from those is according to what you have recommended to yourself: it is that the head of the patient be shaved, and the head of the patient be rubbed in the occiput at the place of both veins with a soft cloth in good friction; tighten strongly the patient's seat with a bandage inside which appears the two veins and their places near the ears in two prepared places of the head; and if you feel the pulse of those in the third finger, and if you sense the pulse of those in the third finger, here you will have it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and take you introduce that beneath the vein in the codeine inside so that the phlebotomy comes out to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And take you raise your hand at the vein and the codeine to the upper parts and inside, and incise the vein in an incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two digits adjusted or around that; and make a slight flow of blood as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And take you tighten the poultices and apply them inside so that it be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now I have preceded in the commencement of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More, of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the treatment of phlebotomy is for ancient and badly behaved migraines and frequent and stubborn ophthalmia and body of acute and overflowing superfluities to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what you have recommended to yourself: constrict the patient's seat with a motive inside so that the two veins appear at the sentiment for manifest appearance and demonstrate the pulse of those beneath the third finger; and then you will have it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And take you raise the codeine above the vein to the upper parts with the third finger indicating, and introduce the phlebotomy incidentally beneath, and raise the vein in its place; and incise that thus as you have done in the two other veins; and make a flow of blood according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And you release the constriction of the patient's hip, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that joint and poultices and strengthen that constricted part, and thus it will be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	Now the memory of the patient's urine is examined, and from that, the diagnosis, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so the juvenation of phlebotomy on the vein of the forehead is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic one, for ancient evils of the face and to emigrate and to purge and to cleanse fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy is according to what you have recommended to yourself; so it is that the patient holds their arm with a bandage, until it appears the vein; and then take the instrument which is called a fleam, whose shape is this.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop at the prominent point where the head of the fleam is on that vein and pierce it with a gentle touch or another cause in the manner of the hand, and thus let the healthy blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened in the phlebotomy site, however it is not known that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity, thus like the other phlebotomies, except for the lateral extremity, and phlebotomize according to the transverse, because the bone is close and strongly holds the tendon in the phlebotomy site when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The juvenation of the two veins that are like the lachrymal ones of two eyes for scabs on the eyes to purge and cleanse them, and at the evils of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient holds their arm with a bandage, and then phlebotomize them, and you stand still over the head of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And it is done the phlebotomy according to the transverse, a little at a time with little phlebotomy, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly the extremity of it is torn.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the healthy blood flow as much as you need, and stop on that joint, and strengthen it for one night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and violent sweat, and for the evils of the face and to emigrate and to purge which accumulate in the face, and more so when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient holds their arm and you place your left hand on it, and take the subtle fleam and fix it in the middle place at the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear at all here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You know that you ultimately place your hand on the small phlebotomy little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, because it is restored gently.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The juvenation of phlebotomy of the two guides leads to constriction of the wings and beginning of leprosy and many evils and putrid ulcers corroding like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that the patient holds their thighs with a bandage; and the artisan is above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein at length with little phlebotomy, little by little; and then extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed at that time; and then make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the bandage and strengthen the two veins with a gentle structure so that the patient is not suffocated, and thus it will be healed by morning because the plague is cured.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the juvenation of phlebotomy of the Algerich veins, comforts small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and evil ulcers and fissures, and evil ulcers that are in the nose and in the circle of it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit down, and strengthen their arm with a bandage, and then revolve their lips and regard the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is for the blackness of each of both, and that is why in the circle of those small black veins; and then you inject each one for an incidental injection.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Perhaps you have doubt there, and you don't know which one is of those, then you understand the injection of the greatest of those, and of the most manifest pus of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it similar to the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Perhaps customarily it is more correct to inject the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	From the two veins that are opened on the tongue, the juice is extracted to perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in preference to those in the throat, at the uvula's malady, and at the maladies of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy on those is that it follows the malady between your hands before the sun, and raises the tongue of it, and examines the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not ultimately harm your hand in phlebotomizing those, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the hollow of the elbow are those that usually correspond to all the homes, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods, or they put the phlebotomizing mirror or olive wood at a subtlety declining; or they cauterize with a cutting cautery, and apply it to the ankle, and this is their form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And that ankle is suitable for section and for those special thin and subtle ones according to the amplitude of the veins and according to their structure.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of phlebotomy mirror:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is the side of the mirror thus many times, and it is suitable for opening the concave full veins appearing gross, and to those that contain much gross turbulent blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of phlebotomy olive wood:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser latitude and of less subtle extremity, and it is suitable for phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain much subtle clear fluid.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Moreover, the juice of the phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood from the maladies that are below the throat and the colon, and from that which dries the chest and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is suitable for the phlebotomizer, when phlebotomizing that one, to be careful with that and be above-temperament in that, because below there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts at the point of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause fluxes of blood, so that it may not happen that they do not phlebotomize with a pungent phlebotomy, unless being sectioned like an ankle.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave that one and that you move to another, or that you seek some other vein; or that you phlebotomize at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and you will find that with a phlebotomy ankle thus as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	Moreover, if you want the phlebotomy of the metacarpal, then it is necessary to enter into the structure of the arm that you touch the place within which you recognize the place of the pulses, and you will feel about it with your hand; and you will lift the arm and you will see the concave vein in section with a phlebotomy ankle thus as we have said; and beware that you do not hit the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you do so, with the strength of the ligament, it inflates at the place where you have felt with your hand, then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and therefore you should avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the phlebotomy thus as the urine of an infant, and the blood is subtle red, then you know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then you touch and pause the aforementioned thing about that for a long space; and you will stop the aforementioned thing, and if the blood is absorbed, because many veins are absorbed, then you strengthen the arm and leave that one.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And beware of the malady of the moisture of it, and be above-temperament about it and do not touch that one for some days until it is healthy.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	Moreover, if the blood is not absorbed, and it seems that you do not present medicine for that, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is constricted, and the blood is absorbed; or you take a bandage of fistic, and do that, and take one vein and strengthen it over the place of the vein with strict structure and ligament and pulpils until another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is absorbed, it is good; and if not, then you cure that one with water from which it proceeds to the remembrance of the place of the powders absorbing flux of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the absorption of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Moreover, of the dark vein the phlebotomy is juice that extracts the blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, thus as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomizer to be above-temperament in the phlebotomy of it, because below there is a nerve; and then if he adjusts at the point of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, it will cause stupor, and it is difficult to heal it, and often it is not healthy at all. And this nerve appears with many veins to the sentiment; and if it is hidden in some homes and is subtle and does not show, then it is necessary that you pause the phlebotomy at which you phlebotomize in section of the ankle, and avoid the nerve at your forcelessness.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you pinch the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The juvenile treatment of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the pains of the heels.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And be careful in this treatment, if you want the phlebotomies to puncture at a phlebotomy olive or at a phlebotomy myrtle; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it is not near an artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Never emperor convenes to you to give phlebotomy that guards that the phlebotomy does not puncture the head of the Lacert so much alone, and seeks the place more lightly, and does not touch it, if not assisted by the primary percussion that is above that phlebotomy some times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Never emperor forces are apostemated in some homes, when it is not phlebotomized on the primary percussion, never touches in that aposteme.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the phlebotomy of that and its accidents are so many, in which you should think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of it is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the conservation of health and for the hope of its improvement and caution against the occurrence of pains, and that it be done phlebotomy in one of the veins that are in the body, such as: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that it be done phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when apparent signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or at the first hour after three hours have passed since sunrise.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Never phlebotomy that is administered, never when it provokes convenience and necessity at any time, or of night or of day, at all hours and in all circumstances.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And be careful that if the infant is not phlebotomized until they have fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except for the fourth month within the seventh, and the old people who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for some mania, be careful that you mundify the six veins within the phlebotomy with a clean cluster, if in those there is a retained mucus, so that the veins do not attract superfluities during the phlebotomy of the veins, which are pure, and do not disturb the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not phlebotomize the patients who are nauseous and crippled, nor those who are suffering from pain or from breathlessness until that which is being removed from them is restored, nor those with dropsy, and never that phlebotomy should be tempted near colic passion and near vomiting, and near abdominal pains, and near multiplication of coughs and of troubles and of exercises of fasting or of vigils and of all causes that dissolve virtue, whether it be a corporal28 or animal one.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider in subtlety of humors within that if the blood is gross, with wines and beverages, and with medicines if it is possible to adjust it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And also enter into bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or be excited by some exercise so that the blood is subtled.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy of it in the foot of the day, so it is around the hour of tierce, thus as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And perform that the foot of that one be guarded on that day from all evil accidents animals, thus as it is anguish, anger, fear, and all corporeal accidents, thus as it is trouble and excessive pain and coughs and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at its session, make the causes present in the use of that which corrects customarily in the houses with aromaticity and odorament and with balms and similar to them according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomizer on a cushion that is put above the cushion of that one who must be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And also extract the six arms, and rub that one with their hand the phlebotomizer does two or three times; and also strengthen the ligament in correction and involve those two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And be the tempered structure, because the structure when it is not engorged, or the structure is superfluous, then prohibits the flow of blood; or it is mollification, and then prohibits the body of the blood's essence.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And also the structure, be careful that one who must be phlebotomized rubs their hands together between them so that the veins are inflated, and are declared to the sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And also the phlebotomizer anoints the six phlebotomies with a few drops of oil antic properly; and also pause the six fingers of the left hand over that vein, below the place where you want the phlebotomy, so that the vein receives a few drops, and the percussion is seated because one of the veins is the one that attracts thus as a fugent cord wants the phlebotomy, and of those it is full of windiness and when pauses the phlebotomy over that it is contracted thus the phlebotomizer; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, it is necessary that the flow of blood to the fingers should be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then stop the flow of blood, more if a vein is opened in a slight way, then it is good; and if not, you iterate to another spot below that place a little, or above where you are fasting, if the place is not affected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is affected, or the patient's disorder worsens, then you leave it alone for a day or two, and do not stretch the limb, because strong stretching can cause an affected joint to deteriorate further, nor does it enter into balance.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then iterate the bloodletting if it is loved (or desired).
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and you subtly correct the blood, and fear that you do not know the quantity that you want, then you iterate the bloodletting in that tract according to rectitude and adjust it in the perception a little, and do so before the place becomes affected, because the affected place becomes worse in many homes due to little perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if the affected place is already affected, then do not iterate upon it, because it does not excuse you from any cause; and pause on that particular part of the wound of oil, because it alleviates the body's blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place where oil is and that the other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer the wound of oil in all bloodletting, which bloodlettings prohibit the body's blood from flowing, and make a tyrical and sagzenous remedy when it is paused on one of those above the place, because the blood is subtly evacuated and revolved when it is gross.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of bloodletting a great aposteme is generated, because many slight accidents occur, and mainly to one who has not been bled since that time, or in the perception of the little vein, and then you touch, and pause on the place, applying an infusion of hot water and salt, a little scalded, and hold it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary that you do this to stop the flow of blood from that vein, completing it with its own or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you remain in the place for several days with some blackness or viridity, do not notice it; and if you want, pause on that particular cause of aloen and mirra dissolved, or some cause of juice of mintaster or calamint or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many slight accidents occur with apostemes and eminences from bloodletting of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore pause your hand over that, and if then you apply a gentle compression over that, then that eminence is evil and bad; and then beware that you pause on that particular cause of what we have said, because strong flow from the artery's blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And do you instill it in what is stipulated, so that the place may be indurated, and then heal that wound with another healing process until it is sanctified.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract from the blood of every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears on the surface of the blood, as it seems.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then you leave it flowing until it becomes red; and similarly if you find it gross, then you leave it flowing until it becomes subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, until the acuity of it is stopped.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a slight way, that the bloodletting of the vein be amplified and the bloodlettings be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in one who is frail, do the contrary of that, and it is necessary to extract that in many slight ways, and that the tract be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the better way to administer bloodletting of a vein is that it should be the transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood and from injury to nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And at the time when it is customary to come across syncopes from bloodletting, and it is necessary that you cure them beforehand with bloodletting in a small infusion of mild milk or simple oximel scalded; and extract the bad blood in three slight ways or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is complicated by completeness, then take beforehand with bloodletting to infuse in a syrup of mirra or in a syrup of mel aromatized with spices thus as with pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in an aromatized and very odorous syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if accidents occur from bloodletting, and it is the cause of much blood's issuance, then it is necessary to take in drinking water of carnation and a very odorous syrup; and use aromaticity with some algualea, and let the body's foot be limited in that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division of the chapter on syncopes for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if one wants to evacuate the bad blood and dissolve the second vein, which is at the level of the flea-borne disease, for a rapid evacuation, and its strength is fragile, which evacuates the small blood little by little, it is according to the quantity of the strength in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But if one wants to evacuate the bad arm, and cut the second vein, and the body is strong, then do so at about nine hours or six of the first flea-borne disease.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But if one wants to attract the bad blood of the body from the opposite side of the affected part, it is because it was evacuated on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is much bad blood already scattered and accumulated and causes fever, because it was cut from the vein in one vein and a large quantity was amplified, so that the perception increases inside until it induces syncope; and you place your hand over the pulse of the vein, so that no mortal danger occurs at the site of syncope, since many veins end there when the flea-borne disease doctor is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not suitable when you want to release the arm and evacuate the second vein, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is very difficult to remove the blood, that you press underneath with great violence and the vein is extended at length, because this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the ladder inside so that it is flea-borne disease secondarily; or remain there with the acute flea-borne disease doctor who is coagulating the blood in the orifice of the vein; or pause on that of tyriacal alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress underneath with a longer compression so that the blood is forced out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is apostematous, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the apostema is settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to provoke the evacuation of the second blood, and there is no excuse, then prick that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funnel of the arm" is flea-borne diseased in the place of the fusion or of the basilica, when they are not hardened or shrunken, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the flea-borne disease is that the patient inserts their hand in hot water until the focus becomes red and the vein appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it is strengthened over that limb with a strict Migana structure; and the flea-borne disease doctor operates according to the small transverse, not latitudinally nor according to the longitude.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it is a broad perception and your flea-borne disease doctor is the one who flea-borne diseases that spot on the joint of the hand, a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the blood flow is prohibited, then you put your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you were in the summer days, then you are excused from putting your hand in hot water, and the month is placed with the body of the blood in hot water during winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the flea-borne disease of this vein is more saved than all the other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein, nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the flea-borne disease of the small vein of the right hand is concurrent with the diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the flea-borne disease is that you strengthen your hand with a ligament or with your own hand, because you have put it in hot water, until the vein is inflated and is clearly demonstrated at the moment; and then you operate transversally; and if you insert that from top to bottom, you will not recognize it anymore.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And beware that you do not ultimately place your hand in the flea-borne disease doctor, because it is deprived of the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then you put your hand in hot water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not put it in hot water, the blood will be coagulated at the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And since the blood is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly, because you do everything in a straight line.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the youthful stage of the flea-borne disease of that vein on the left hand is that it is concurrent with the diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And thus similarly in the flea-borne disease of him, it happens as it does in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youthful stage of the Sephena vein in flea-borne disease is at the diseases that are on the affected part of the body, thus as it is with the diseases of the mother, and with retention of menses, and with the diseases of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and legs, and their similar appearances.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the flea-borne disease is that the patient inserts their foot in hot water and does it on that friction until the veins appear; and then on the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein has a visible tail, and from there it ramifies into the face of the foot with many ramifications.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore it is necessary to apply a large poultice around the entire thigh, from the ankle to the knee, which is better and more soothing.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you apply poultices on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to irritate the nerves that are underneath the surface of the foot, and stop your poulticing in the area where you applied them across, lest you wish to cause an ulcer.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And these are the soothing poultices.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if it is prohibited to issue blood; then you should soak the patient's foot in warm water and let the blood flow out of that area so that it may be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the poultice-maker erred in the first dressing, then soak again with a little poultice, because the area is salty; and do not fear the evil mixture, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly make a dressing on the opposite foot in the same way.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the area is similar to what we have said, from the knee down to the hollow of the Silvester's joint.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the juice of the poultice is good for pain in the ankle when it is caused by bad blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the poultice is that the patient enters into a bath, and fixes and strengthens the bandage of their ankle under the hollow of the thigh beneath the knee beneath four fingers in a long, subtle bandage, because it does not appear to be anything but for this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you poultice that place according to each engineer's art that is possible for you and according to the crossing, and it is better; or you ulcerate that place for ulceration or you dry that place for drying, because the area of it is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many homes a greatly loved thing; and if you touch that, and it does not appear to the whole sentiment, then poultice some part of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot, including the auricular and anular digits.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and make flow from the blood as much quantity as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then loosen the structure and stop over the area of the poultice, cutting and strengthening the area, because the easing is healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	About ventilation and the qualities of using those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilations are made with horns, or with iron, or with glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done in two manners: one of them is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is without scarification is done in two ways, because either it is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 13 places of the body, among which one place where ventilations are stopped is in the armpit, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of two parts of the neck together; and ventilations of the chin below the jawbone below the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of alohoster, and it is above the end of the hip; and ventilations of two focus points, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavities; and ventilations of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small sparse veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not capture the virtue through them, just as it is captured by poulticing; nor is it known that ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any malady made for replenishment until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if it is necessary to provoke ventilation for illness or for continuation, administer that at every hour at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in the homes where blood is multiplied until it reaches the point of extraction through ventilation and touches the dry, grave, and heavy head; and from those, it touches replenishment and rigor in their face and in the dry head, and in the dry neck; and from those, it touches prurience in their face and in the dark forehead and tenebrousness and hebetude in the dry wheels; and from those that throw away the place of their ventilation; and from those, their flow is multiplied; and from those, it touches gustation of blood in their mouth, or the tongue is apostemed and spits out blood; and from those, their sleep is multiplied, and from those who vomit blood in their sleep with rigor and antics and plagues and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens in any of those causes, and properly if it is on the third or middle day of the month, then command ventilation to be done more than two or three hours past the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the juice of ventilation of the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and to this end that it is founded in the wheels; but it is known that this should be a proper evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this windiness is at the location of flea-biting of the headache.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not lawful to use it on one who has a complete fracture, or in the case of catarrh, because it gives great annoyance.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, it is not suitable to use those old things, and in the cases of those who have evil frequent maladies.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More, to him who is continually forgetting about it, it is suitable that you command the wind-remover to place his hand a little above the windy area below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	More wind-removal of alkahel is at the location of flea-biting of the dark vein and of the basilica: and for that reason it confers asthma, and to the constriction of those and to the scission of the instrument of those, and to all, and to replenishment.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is suitable that the wind-removal of alkahel be applied a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debilitation in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the wind-removal of alhagdahan confers on accidental pains in the head and opthalmia, and migraine, and forehead-pressure, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the location of flea-biting of the basilisk.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is suitable that you command the wind-remover not to press his hand on the scarification so that he does not incise the artery and accelerate flows of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And wind-removal below the mouth confers on acidity in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resemblance to those evil maladies that are in the mouth, and it is at the location of flea-biting of the aliharic that are between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	More, the wind-removal that is made on the two spatulas confers on a warming, which is done for replenishment of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the wind-removal of the two divided parts of the focus confers on juvenation of the flea-biting of three veins, so it is of the basilica, dark and cephalic, because that attracts the blood from all those veins plus many that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the other large veins enter to bring about the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the wind-remover to not proceed with scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and below that are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a windiness on which is wind-removed over the hips and confers on the hemorrhoids of the backside and the ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is suitable that you command the wind-remover to be a great windiness, and that it be of iron, because the place indicates a strong desiccation; and strongly those subtle wind-removed areas are scarified in scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More wind-removed areas of the smallest veins manifest for minimal manifestation, because they attract the blood from the whole body, and confer on ancient pains of the joints and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruations, and confer on bothor and ademil; and it is at the location of flea-biting of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, I will not translate this sentence as it appears to be a mix of words from different languages and doesn't form a coherent phrase in the medieval medical treatise language. It seems to be a jumbled collection of words.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the wind-removed areas alahorcoben, the juvenation is propelled to the juvenation of the wind-removed areas of two veins.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the wind-removed areas is that it pauses the windiness at the commencement of the evacuation and sucks for tempered suction, and does not prolong the position of the wind-removed areas, more pauses those lightly, and remains coytaded, and that the humors come to the location for adventitious ingual.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease iterating that and continue until you see the location already enraged and inflated and that appears the rigor of the blood.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who has tender flesh of rare pores, it is suitable that you scarify him moderately and not too much, so that the place may not be ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the wind-remover to amplify the scarification and make a little impression, and temper the suction with facility.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is gross, then it is suitable to scarify two moderate impressions, because in the first impression, the way of subtlety to the blood and to its acquosity is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More in the second, the scrutiny acquired of the extraction of the gross blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very feculent, then it is suitable to make a third scarification impression in order to cleanse the latter.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract much blood, we make a moderate scarification; and if we know that the blood is gross, then it is suitable to make a profound scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of surgical incision in which lies the depth of the codeina as much as possible.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the codeina is thick, hard, dark, and the juices are very strained, it means that the places of the ventoses are not tenderly touched, but rather resolved openly; if it is in summer time, then use oil of aloen or oil of violet, or oil of bitter herbs, or oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of camamille, or of sanctum, and to those that seem similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superficies are thick, frozen, then use oil of marjoram, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloen, or oil of anise, and to those that seem similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the ventoser is of ample pores to tender flesh, then it means that oil is prohibited, and it means that one should apply those places of ventoses with a gentle lavation of warm water or cold water of solatrum, or water of chamomile, or water of bordeaux, and similarly to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose wound is of much humidity, wash its ventoses with a gentle agreement, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similarly to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And that one whose superficies are thick, wash its ventoses with gentle antiquity, or with water of sage, which is majorana, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to those that seem similar.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it means that the ventosation should be kept away from bathing; having meant that it should be administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and it means that one should sleep close to the ventosation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed so that a veinous person should be governed by blood-letting before ventosation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It means that you should consider the commencement: then if the ventoser or one who needs to be blood-let is choleric and vents about the wound with agitation and inflammation, then it means that you should take causes of cooling, such as milgrana acetosa, and endivia in a gentle agreement, and laytigua, and julep, and similarly to those.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause at their wanderings, such as poultices, and carnations of ausel's serums, and wanderings conjoined with agreements, and to those that seem similar.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that one whose complexion is frozen, it means that you should take in drinking eyssarop almiva, or eyssarop of ausel's serums of sesame, and sumac, and there is much odorant migier between viel and noel; and that it is commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause the wanderings of their poultices and canabir and pissers and small ausels and colombat.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it means that on the day of ventosation and phlebotomy, the drinking should be more than the wandering.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it means that you should give in drinking at certain hours to certain homes tyrical alpharac, or medicaments of musk, so it is muscada, or alceta away from ventosation or phlebotomy or close by, so that the principal members are comforted and the wound is subtled; and it does not mean that you should take that scalping.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the ventoses that are operated on with scarification are those that are paused on the feet, and on the gouty and podagra, and on the umbelic, in the places of the joints, and the pixida of the ankle, because these members do not suffer from scarification above them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those except attraction of wound of member, such as pausing ventosa on mamilha in bad flux of wound of the veins; and using that per that the ventosation is dissolved, frozen and inviscated from the member, such as pausing on the belly and umbelic; because that rarefies the member and scales it and reduces the pain since it resolves ventosation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is paused on the roots when they are stuck in their operation or poultice, because by virtue of strong attraction the humble operation eradicates the poultice from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it is paused on the feet and gouty areas, where ventosation is enclosed in those.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventoses are administered with juice as much as possible; and some vegetables are administered with focus.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some vegetables are administered full of water, steeped in the bad fluxes of the gouty areas.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the ventosa should be filled and should be pushed grandly, so it is boiling water alone or water in which herbs are cooked for that convenience.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of ventosa administered with focus: it is the amplitude of the orrifici of two digits, according to which we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon should be the width of a palm; and it should be in the latz of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the width of it, the trauc should be small according to the quantity that enters into it through a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made of raw ram's horn, of thick margins, lion, and eagles, through which the member is not led astray from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And make a mixture of the transverse vein of the ram or iron, where you will place a lit candle at the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the great remedy that we have recommended; and the small pain of that, according to the illnesses and the state of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping glasses of the old men are extended to others, whereas those of the young and robust bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this cupping glass over the member is that it extends the flame from the decent candle made of wax, and places it above the transverse vein in the middle of the place of the cupping glass, so that the fire is kindled around the part below, so that the body of the patient is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed over the member of the patient, and the finger is on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we hold the cupping glasses and do not indicate that they obstruct the finger and release the vapor through that hole, then the cupping glass will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And you should ignite the wick according to its manner, and then you will indicate if it is obstructed by that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	There is a cupping glass that is administered in the case of flatulence, with water, in which there is no transverse vein nor hole, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed over the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this cupping glass, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 148.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood-letting is not administered in many members except in those members where it is not possible to place cupping glasses, due to their smallness, such as the vein and gum, which seem like them; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose, and thus they seem.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found blood-letting cups that are on the dirty and polluted parts of the body.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they are washed with dirty water during the day and night until they are famished, and that no remaining cause is in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated through flebotomy and cupping glasses; and then the member of the patient is cooled until it becomes red; and then they are placed over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And since they are filled and in a case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck from the place with the cupping glass, it is better to delay in juvenation.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with wine and then with much water; and it is cooled and extracted.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the blood is prolonged by the administration of blood-letting cups, and it is that which remains, then you put a piece of cloth in cold water, and place that over it until the remaining fluid is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then powder over it with vitriol thrice, or gall and similarly to them of the stiptic causes, until the blood is abscessed; or place over the location the mastics of excruciated beans, and they are washed until the beans adhere to the location, and the blood is abscessed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if required, to repeat the blood-letting, when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the blood-letting cups are prohibited from suspension, then cool the place with recent blood or fix a needle in the places until blood is obtained; and then they are placed, because those who feel any blood at all adhere to it.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall, powder over them a little of thrice-tried aloe, or salt, or cinder, and it will happen soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, you know that they throw away this chapter, the foolish doctors and the vulgar ones, and those who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is made that this manner of the sciences in our land is private; and you do not have it and have forgotten it all at once; and no one has inhabited it since, except by length of reading of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, until they extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I will direct an experiment and study in the length of my own life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my experiment; since I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered it from occupation of prolongation; and I will abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and I will show it at the end of declaration; and I will form it in many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, thus I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being broken bones, from which the necessary preliminary is, before we begin the remembrance of fractured members and diverse ones.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, we will discuss in the proem of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which from the beginning are forced by the artisans and stationed over the truth of these; so it is you and those that are so prompt that they know or apprehend this noble art better than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore it is said that when accidents occur due to fracture or dislocation or twisting or fall, then it is known that you should begin with flebotomy or alleviation of that, or some remedies, if no cause prohibits, and thus with debilitation of virtue, or it is that which occurs suddenly, or it is in decrepit state, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and lean meats of birds and crabs; and prohibit gross meats and fill up on diets and entire diets that fill the veins with blood, so that you will be secure from apostemeous ulcers, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the members.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first regimen as is customary for them.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And then when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is known that the patient should be fed with nutritious diets of subtle and light nutriment, and not viscous, such as those diets made from flour, water, rice, cabbage, peas, fresh fish, and similar things, and in this regimen there is a coagulation of fracture pus, which is easier to heal.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that the broken bones, when they are in the old men who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit states, it is not possible that they can continue and be consolidated according to their nature through the desiccation of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time through the desiccation of those members, and they continue and consolidate those that are of theirs at the end of the length, just like the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But the Emperor Nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of the whole party any cause similar to glue in which it is grossly that adheres and strengthens until they are conglomerated and united, until they reach the end of fortitude and firmness, just like a focus at the beginning, until no cause prohibits that from their works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the diets of the patient, diets in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, just as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fracture according to the variety of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have come to a remembrance of all species of fracture, explained in their distinct chapter, separate from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fracture in itself, in its own measure.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their own measures; for there is a curved fracture other than that which occurs in the stars; and some veiled ones are made into fractures according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagittal and stellar and additional proceeding and not-proceeding, just as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a fracture of small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to each species belongs a proper torment in restoration of it according to what will come as a remembrance of it, distinctly in its own places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign or indication of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that reason it is known as fracture of the bone: it is a twistedness of it, and of its prominence and appearance to the sentiment, and so of it when it comprises that with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And then when it is not in the place of apparent twistedness nor is it felt by the finger touching when it touches the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	However, it is possible that there is twistedness or small fissure, therefore you do not feel with your hand and with compression of all; however, pause over it from the medicines of which I have remembrance at that moment when it convenes to the place; and then be straight for subtle structuring.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the place where it is curved and not divided into two or another thing that does not occur in the sagittal, as it is remembered by all parties of its comparison, then it is known that it begins from your hour to rectification of it, however, that it occurs with apostemeous ulcers.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it occurs with apostemeous ulcers, then leave that for some days until the ulcer ceases; and then begin to treat it according to whatever manner you can of levitation and of ingenium.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You know that restoration of it and agility of it are more necessary than the bones in which accidents occur.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that second when memory of it will return.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	Perhaps in the bones so shattered, then extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, whether it's the hand or the foot; or you have your hand if the member is small; or use two cords or a cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And it's your position in which you hold the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member are then perforated, so that you make those additions return to their place and according to each manner that you can put them in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware that you don't fall on the patient during your operation, neither injuring nor lesioning; and perform according to your gentle power that you apply one bone with another, its companion, according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is good that at that hour you touch with your hand there, and if sometimes here is a different cause, correct that and set it in order according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, thus as many foolish doctors who make vain attempts to accelerate aposteme with their operation, or make counter-operations on the member, thus as we have seen through the operations of their vain attempts.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connect, adjust and perform a decent operation and structuring of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about it and make them avoid moving it during their vigils and sleep, and see its revolution and agitation, and remove its ejection, and remove all its movements with total virtue; and beware that the position of the member is a position in which pain is ensured, which cause is because one feels in the disposition of the position of the member or lesion; then it's good to change it to another disposition where no pain is felt; and take care that the position of it is direct and equal, so that the member doesn't acquire tortuosity when it's restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which you have recommended; because you know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the knee, and similar to those, then it's good that the wrapping be with very subtle cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Perhaps those that are large, such as the hip or the leg, it's good that in those there be a hard and durable wrapping, because the strong connection connects the big member and strengthens it entirely with equal structure, so that in it no bruise enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, adjust your evacuation of equality, pause a suitable ligament according to that, above the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the member's merit; and strengthen your hand a little on the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then see that it is in that part above the place of the fracture, and strengthen yourself so that you don't force your structure on the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then elongate yourself in the wrapping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure little by little, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the broken place with wrapping, and then see that the wrappings are on the part below the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the wrapping and in softening of it according to what we have said in the primary wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the turns of wrapping with a smooth cloth or fabric on which the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized, if there is tortuosity in it; and otherwise, don't pause in it for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause on the other bandage, and then equalize on these wrappings decently made so far, if in the place there is no inflammation or aposteme, and then pause on it which sits the aposteme that and stops the inflammation; and leave it like that for some days; and then you strengthen on the wrapping.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And these wrappings are of the majesty of cane or strong reed, and be formed wisely; or of wood of pine; or of ribs of palm; and let each wrapping be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it's good that the wrapping which is paused on that fracture be a little thicker and stronger than the other wrappings, and the length of the stake according to what is suitable for the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen on the wrappings with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then bind below decently as we have said about structure, and it's that your structure be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when more is aligned from the fracture, it's lessened the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it's good that the threads be medium in thickness and subtlety, and be of soft wool; and if the threads are thick, thus as you have seen through the operation of some foolish doctors pausing the threads of twisted cords of wool, and it's a great error, when one doesn't hold the structure for equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And in this way the subtle remedies are not so convenient, because you do not constrict them by strict structure as those that you want, and it does not happen that between this and that there is less than a day's worth.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stars to put structure in their places, then stop those of stopping the lion or the caramelized entrails so that it does not make a lesion.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some broken fractures are a plague, and accidents cause disruption in the code, and you will find a reminder in that chapter according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that not all broken members are straight on the first day; the cause is because the member, when it's large, does not fit onto the stars until about five or seven days, according to your secure advancement of abscess caution.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the implants in which the Ancients restored them, which they placed on fracture and dislocation and torsion.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of implantation as an abbreviation of restoration of fracture, convenient for complex joints and majorment to the femurs and to the effigies, because it is about that on which there is no heat nor cold: and it is that you take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you will find that it is like this, except that you sieve that one in the white album of egg, and stop the complexation of it not being spacious nor subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manipulation for implanting a fracture and dislocation and twisting: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of milgraner salvage, one dram; mirra and aloen one dram five; alochil one dram twenty; all are mixed and stirred and then blended with water or album of Huou if the complexity of the patient's wound is scaled; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quite rightly, and confers a lot of homes.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manipulation for implanting which confers a fracture and twisting: recipe of migrach and a half dram of white alta, one dram; mirra and aloen one dram five; acacia one dram six; Armenian bol one dram twenty.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All things are ground in a mortar with a very contrary motion, and all things are sieved, and all things are confected in the water or in the white album of egg and it is administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of implantation for joints and separated bones in their places, and then accidental pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take a lane's poultice and immerse it in warm oil and cut it and place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this implantation there is no virtue of restoration, of cautious abscess and expelling pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of implantation that restores broken bones: take flowers of fig tree sort and flowers of saved poppy; mix all and make an implantation of theirs.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of implantation abbreviated administered for restoration of fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: recipe mixture of alta, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of peas, of all in a part. all things are ground and all things are cooked in wine, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	More if it is scalded, then you find that one in water of hot colander or in water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of implantation that is very strong in resolution, which is this first one, when it aids abscess during restoration of the member: recipe of mixture of alta and of sesame of lydia, and of balaustia, and mellilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all in a part; all things are ground and all things are cooked in water of sage or in water of dousa or in wine, all that according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	More Hippocrates did not dissect in the free will that it is placed on the broken member during restoration of it, unless cerote makes a layer of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it is mixed between grossness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	More in Galen's opinion it is seen that all things are placed on the broken member during restoration of it and the causes in which it is dryness with little warmth so like myrrh, incense and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Many types of plaster that can be applied to the lesion and pain: take miga powder, from cedar, from pellets of a man's urine or from juniper, and from altea, and salt, divided into equal parts; apply trissat and cribellat, and apply cofit, and make a proper plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Measure the quantity according to which you think will remain the ligature and then dislocate it, so that you consider if there is no accident, nor prick, nor the bone is broken, nor it has moved from its place, then you do not delay more than two days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you find the place of violent pain or prick or inflammation, then you touch or delay it at that hour, and remove its plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth of linen and marine sponge humid, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the place until the prick and pain are calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then pause above the lane under the submerged bandage, with vinegar and oil or rose oil, and leave it on for a night until you are sure of avoiding apostema, and that the inflammation of the member is reduced, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a subtle structure and small plaster, not too strong for your primary construction, and subtly add it until it is healthy.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the apostema and redness and pain and inflammation and all the accidents are completely removed, and you have dispensed with plasters and structures, then you will apply it thus, as you have done from the beginning of the treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if you do not find any cause in the member among those that we have mentioned, then do not delay it unless for three days or four or five. and some remedies that are applied for 20 days according to how it appears per the dislocation of the member, thus as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure altogether, and assist in the digestion of the patient's food, according to what is preceded by the reminiscence of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More often if you find the place of the fracture is dried and extended more than it should not cover, then you know that the nutrient is prohibited from reaching it; and therefore wrap it with warm water altogether, which has been applied to it; and it will be in all three days; and loosen the structure a little, and by this operation correct the member's nutrient, and it will be healthily restored.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More often it happens that the foolish restorers of a fractured member do another treatment when it is not restored from the beginning, according to what covers it, and it is restored according to their own twistedness, which is an error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if they were directors, they would aggravate the ancient ills in their free books and would have worked on that.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them who have done anything reasonable, because it is more reasonable that they do nothing.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Head chapter: On fractures that occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by percussion of the spine, and the percussion removes all the bone within the skull, which is behind the bone, thus as it has been said in the fuse, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the spine insinuates into some part of the bone, and insinuates the flesh of it and does not pass into the posterior of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attrition; and its cause is percussion with a stone or fall on a stone, and it seems to them.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that approaches near the periosteum which is behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture that is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made or by fall or by percussion of the stone and it seems to them, that makes some lamina of the bone enter into the deep parts, and it is made in the concave place thus as it occurs in the rows of the bone when they occur by their percussion and are part of their entrance into the deep parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it is made in the bodies of human bones, thus as they are the heads of joints.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And so all these species of fractures are classified, so they are weights thus as they are separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will find the remembrance of all that in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I will discuss all these species of fracture by detection over them and by inquiry into their tents and signs of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The special hair-like fibers are recognized by being discovered on the bone, and they are extracted, and anointed with a thin layer, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see signs that manifest clearly on the skin, such as vomiting from cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of votes, and syncope, and acute fever, and efflux of humors, and rigor of those, and it seems similar to their major dispositions, so it does not seem healthy.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-concurrent accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is because it has come to you in the beginning with plague-like symptoms and this is during the winter days, then you should study the osteological arrangement of the bone on the 14th day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, then you should touch the bone on the 7th day, having that what was left on the bone is corrupted by the panicle, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated to the panicle covering the brain, and it is with divided and atrophied parts, then you should inject the divided and atrophied part, according to what you have recounted to yourself.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover on the bone according to custom and manner possible to yourself, following the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to make the detection of the bone, either by blood or post-crisis caution, then you oppose yourself to it as it is necessary, and it is that you fill the place of drapughts infused with wine and rose oil, and make the plague repose until the apostema is sedated, and you are sure of the flow of blood; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that is according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one manner is that you inject the bone with a straight instrument, and this is its form: Then administer another injection like this, a little further apart than that; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more injections farther apart according to the sequence.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary to have various injections of different names, some of which are farther apart than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the last stage of their extreme parts, and are of iron or felon.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them to facilitate percussion on the injection site so that it does not touch the head and leads to that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, then it is necessary to perforate in its circuit from within while you administer the injections with the tubes, which are called non-deep tubes.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named thus except that those do not reach the term of the bone to what is adjacent to it, so that the tube is rounded at the extremity or margin above what remains of the head of the needle, resembling a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passes the spissitude of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these tubes which almost converge at the spissitude of each bone, until they are presented to you in all tests of the brain with the extremity of which is pointed, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of spissitude of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of tubes: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that it pauses the tube on the bone and revolves around the ties until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; and then permutes the tube to another place, and pauses what is between all the tracts, according to the quantity of the grossness of the radius or environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then inject with injections what is between each tract of the bone, and make that more subtle which you place on it in the end of levitation, as we have said, until you radiate the bone, or hold your hand, or for some other cause to stir up the instruments which will be prepared for that, as we have touched upon and with forceps and subtle strengths.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you keep all caution so that the injection does not touch any cause of the cipher.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus you will have circuited the perforated bone, and it will be separated from the cipher if it is continued in it, and you will have extracted that, it is necessary to reason and equalize that in the asperity of it from what is in the bone with another instrument similar to an injection, more imperial because it is thinner and more subtle than the other injections.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you remain with some small bone fragments and satangia, then take that facilitated to what is necessary for you of the instruments; and then cure the plague in the lynxes and unite those which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is to scrape, far from pain, which Galen and the experts say is for great sorcery; and this is the sermon of it: it is necessary for you at the beginning that begins to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and you have placed it beneath the extremity of this slow and gentle inscissor, which is the form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	It is that the lenticular part is lazy and does not incise any cause, and the acute part is of it in two directions beforehand in longitude, thus sometimes; so that the lenticular part should be adjusted to the ciphac on the face of the incident acute bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you percussion over the incision of a part with a small hammer until you have incised the whole bone to facilitate thus as it is revolved, and you will be secure from the panniculus that does not fall into the accident that happens in no manner, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their lore; certainly, and if it was dormant.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When you have reached the Romania of some annexed cause to the bone of the panniculus in certain places of the bone, you will incise that of it with the extremity of the lenticular incisor, and you will deliver that of it facilitated, because it is delivered from its injury and its pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is absorbed or removed from the bone is its face, and you remain in its roughness and subtle saggings, then it is necessary that you remove that roughness and eradicate those saggings with subtle razors for which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that you can possibly administer them in every place most convenient to them and most direct according to what you perceive in your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is necessary that you administer in your razor at the time when the bone begins to be most latent of those razors, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease until according to continuity you have achieved administering the whole tone and the whole subtle part of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Moreover, in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary that you administer care according to what you perceive in order to achieve rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is the cause that has not been diminished regarding all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we will stop on what we have written and shown you about great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus is retightened when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary that you take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the primary drap and do it as much as possible that you can about that, so that it does not gravitate towards the ciphac; and then administer over that latent liament, and do not stretch it unless for the quantity that the wound has, solely.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that on for a day or two until you are secure from apostemic caution; and then remove it and administer medicines as those which are superfluous dryness, thus with linseed oil and flour of barley, and powder of lichen and aristology, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these powdered medicines that are pulverized over the wound, thus as they are dry; and universally, administer in all medicine of property of which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and it is not in the surdity of evil intent nor another; nor do not let virulence accumulate in it; because when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and falls upon the patient with that malignant malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it falls upon the ciphac of the head, as of it is mondified bone and majorly when the cure of it is misrepresented, and it is blackened on the surface of it; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the patient with the accidents that we have said, knowing that it is perilous and all doctored.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not fall black except from the medicine that is placed beneath, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then it is necessary that you take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil. and in those lines take a drap, and then place it over the ciphac; and then cure it with the species of cure that converge until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not broken nose but two parties together, or one of those curved veins, because there are two bones, because the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not fall to it except with attrition and tortuosity and sinuity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two broken parts is fractured, then it is necessary that you introduce the small instrument into the nasal passage, and that you adjust that fracture in the same direction as the indicator, and in the same direction as the poultice beforehand, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And make it easy for you to facilitate, and be careful that you do not fall into that pitfall during your operation on the patient's abdomen.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not perceive to that, then it is necessary that it be equalized with the extremity of the file on which it has been slightly thickened.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the similarity to that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then place the vi or x of the rest of the postulate caution.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of linen, if the fracture is in one part, or two small gauzes, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be in the thickened gauze of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And thus some of the ancient restorers said that the gauzes should be infused in borage, and should be changed every day, but it has not been seen by me; however, it is necessary that the piece be infused in a mixture of honey and powder of moly; and then leave the gauze until the bone is firm and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some vegetables should be inserted into the nose, in place of a gauze, wrapped in a cloth of linen thread; and it is that you already have the fracture of the nose strongly and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do gauzes.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another vegetable postulate caution occurs, apply the nose with a wax candle or anointed with agreeable oil and rose oil, or with diaculum.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If another postulate caution does not occur, then it is necessary to apply beforehand with the powder of sisamum and the powder of coffinseeds in a mixture of honey; and then pause on the cloth of linen, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or so comminuted, then it is necessary to separate them from those, and extract them with instruments that are convenient for them; and then close the suture, and cure it in such a way that it encarnates and consolidates, and applies convenient emplasters to them.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a plague touches the nose, then it is necessary to cure it with gauzes and administer lead tubes until it is completely healthy.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with plague, consider then if the fracture is only slightly so, and not broken in two and curved to the adjacent parts, then its cognition is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you introduce the small indicator on the left in the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the indicator on the right hand; and you will find that the reduction of the fracture is facilitated by the parts beforehand, with your other hand on the preceding part of the bone; and thus it is decently equalized.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two, then it is necessary to administer extension of the two parts according to rectitude until it is possible to equalize them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if the teeth are dislocated by concussion, then strengthen those with which you expect to remain in a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and then pause on the broken jawbone candle, and then pause on the double cloth, and pause on the large star-shaped cloth decently made, or a sole wrap along the length of the jaw; and then bind it underneath according to how you have prepared the ligature of it and how it is convenient for application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and tranquilize, and pause the food of his swollen lips.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you esteem that the figure has already been altered in some manner, then you correct it and remove it from the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and apply it with powder of moly, or a mixture of honey, or powder of sisamum, since you have removed the candle from it, and pause on the applied cloth of linen.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then come and adjust that emplaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, which does not dislodge until it is healthy and strengthens the fracture; because many vegetables have strengthened this fracture in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another affected area is found, then administer what we have said in the previous treatments for similar conditions in the sediment of the patient, so that it may be healed and the aposteme may be removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a painful wound, then consider whether it is a separated or displaced bone, then you subtly examine those displacements to see what is convenient for their removal in the restoration of the injured parts.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you enlarge it according to the quantity of your need, following the rules of flebotomy.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those displacements, and none will remain there, then you close the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place one of the suitable emplausters that are convenient for that and encrust it, until it may be healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the ankle when it is injured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Similar treatments are broken down into three ways when the ankle is injured from a blow in front of the muscles, and that fracture is made in one of three manners.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch, and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that they touch in the displacements, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is a painful wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a painful wound, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the injured ankle and the other extends their arm to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then unite the fracture with the ties in the correct form according to its shape, so that it is not prominent or concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is suitable to place a small pillow of cloth or wool under the patient's thigh, and its size should be according to your need; and lift and elevate the ankle and shorten the distance with your hand until you unite the fracture as it suits.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the extremity of the ankle to the previous parts, because it is perverted to the knee, then it is suitable that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion should be placed under the muscle of one thigh, in great size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister should place their hand under the muscle of the thigh to the parts below until the bone of the ankle is elevated as it is in its natural position, and then you correct the fracture and unite it with the ties in the correct form.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel displacements of the ankle and its joints, then it is suitable to bend over that and extract those displacements in order to facilitate.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision on it with one of the instruments that have been prepared for that, because you had placed under the ankle the instrument that serves as a ciphac; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, which has the shape of it.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a scoop whose concavity is such; and its width should be according to what is necessary for it, according to the size of the bone or its weakness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you in the operation; that there are two extremities thus at times, and one extremity is wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you extracted the displacement of the bone is wide, and there is no sign of aposteme caution, then you adjust the two lips of the wound to a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear aposteme caution, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the scission of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you suspect aposteme caution, then you put a warm cloth on it and anoint it with oil and rose water, and place it on top of that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the structure of the bone when it is a wound and a section, is that you place an emplaster made of flour of millet in album of egg white, and place it on top of the stoppage, and then place the cushion under the thigh, if you need that, and then take a humectant, so it is twisted, which has a long duration, and its width is one palm or around that; and then place double powders over the stoppage and emplaster; and then take a thin sheet of table, whose width is three fingers and similarly in length; and then wrap that in a cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the sheet at the location above the fracture location; and then place humectant thus, and turn it around the neck of the thigh and under the thigh, and under the thigh of the patient, and reduce it all over the part, and when the structure of the fracture is structured downwards, and it is what does not hide from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And thus, it is not hidden the sheet from the broken bone; and therefore it is suitable that you see the patient every day, so that when the ligament is mollified or the sheet is about to be removed, then you correct it and strengthen the bond.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then pause the sleep of the patient over their neck, and place underneath them the small cushion at night; so that it will be elevated with the help of their latz, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated by the muscle; or their arm is tied to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not dislocate the ligament if it does not come together in the right place or abscess, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen their face to that water, and adjust in the structure and restore it so that it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some vegetables are made in some homes which are done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The splint is broken in the broad part of their side and does not break except at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when the place of theirs is broken — and it is broken in the middle part of theirs — and it is not recognized except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture forces you to prepare theirs and reduce it according to the natural figure in all manner of art, as it is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then pause on the dusty place of many album of Huou and stop lion; and then pause pulverized double cloth; and then pause on the subtle star of table according to the quantity of the whole splint or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Perhaps the star is concave in some of the places of the splint, then you engage that concavity with stopped lion, and then push the star according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen below with a long humanation against decent constriction and firmness of the star until it is not removed from its own place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and all vegetables that are mollified, another vegetable strengthens it and equals the star if it is removed from its own place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And heal the patient over their own broad side there.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the splint is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you will know for certain that it is from the bones which were not tempered nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the ankle and put underneath the bandage, then you will sinew over it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sad apostema, cautiously so that it comes together here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, some vegetables are broken in the middle part of it and that tart ends; perhaps the extremities of its motion end there, which are cicatrized and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of theirs when it is broken in the middle of it, it declines into the internal parts and comes together with great pain, and difficulty in walking, and stumbling, and strong weakness, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient is resupinated over their own back, and placed between their shoulders a small cushion; and then pressed on their muscles, and adjusted their ribs with two rib-counters, and subtly worked on the operation of it and in the equation according to all manner that is possible and that converges to it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then pause on the plaster and stop and pause above the subtle star of table of sauce or of calyx and of their similar levitation, since you envelop it in cloth; and then subtly work on binding that above the broken bone so it is not moved; and go with a bond according to what is returned to the back some vegetables, and strengthen it with decent constriction; and then consider the bond at all hours, and when it is mollified, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to provoke the dislocation of that which causes corrosion or bruising, or pain, or apostema that comes together in the place, then you cut and dissect that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what comes together for the manner of cure of theirs; and then reduce the plaster, if it returns to its face; and adjust its structure until it is healthy.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are cracked.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not happen except in gross places that follow the back; and of the extremities of theirs from the part above they do not come together with contraction but for what is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sensation, because of the inquiry of it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is thus that it unites the fracture with the fingers according to the possible manner, until it is united as it was, and then plasters and strengthens the broken bone with star, if it needs that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the internal parts, then it brings violent pain and puncture, just as puncture brings to one who has experienced pleasure, and for this reason the bones are placed in the wrapping; and it brings difficulty to handle, and thus, and vomiting of much blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Antics are engineered in that limb with many ingenious devices.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they say that it is necessary to pause the veins of the patient that generate inflammation and windiness, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture may be driven towards the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We have avoided this so that it does not cause a light fever to generate a hot abscess, if it does not succeed; and if it does succeed, then it helps with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say that some of them should be paused under the wind and then sucked with a strong fortitude; and it seems like a rationalization, but I, emperor, am afraid that the wind will attract the excesses to the place of debilitation.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say that some of them: it is necessary for the place to be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and powders are paused between the ribs until it is filled, which is the binding wound when enveloping according to the second intention; and then the patient is cured with a cure of pleasing wind and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes violent constraint to the patient who does not suffer, and the bones do puncture with a sharp point, I think about the patient, then it is necessary to bind above the place, uncovering the broken rib, and then pause over that instrument that preserves the cipher, the remembrance of which is preceding, and that inserts the bones in a facilitated way, and extracts that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a dressing, and cure that with emplasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if it succeeds in generating an abscess, then you touch and pour powders into rose oil and pause over the place, and the patient is cured with that which is necessary for the abscess to be generated.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it is resurrected upon the mattress on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some veiled injuries reveal fractures in the neck bones, and similarly they attribute to their own attribution, and likewise to the spine of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when it succeeds in revealing some of them and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider, because if the sieves are more mollified and stupefied and dead and cannot be extended nor strengthened, and when they constrain with lesions or punctures or needles and do not feel pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the same disposition it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if it does that and feels constraint with lesions or punctures, then you know that the nut of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with a cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine of the neck similar to that and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider its feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that it is mollified, it succeeds in revealing to those who have fallen into the masses, and then when you sit upon the sick back, you feel windiness and evacuation of their will, and some veiled injuries are resurrected upon the sick back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not struggle with its cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if it does not succeed in revealing any cause of those, the cause is worse and more feverish.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure of it is that you perform a sedation of the hot abscess that pauses over the atrited spine with rose oil sol, or with mugwort of Houssay's mixture; pause over that some veiled injuries during the day until the hot abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then pause one of the comforting and existent emplasters, and strengthen over that with a liament; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected part where it hurts until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it succeeds in giving the atrition of the satirical bones or some cause that has been separated from it, then it is necessary to succeed over the code and to remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with a suture if it is large; and then cure that with an encarnation of the enguentz, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the bone of the fingers is broken, and it is the end of the rib, then it is necessary that you insert the finger in the left hand in the back, and that you join the broken bone in the other hand according to what is possible for second equilibrium; and then pause over the emplaster and astelha, if you need those, and then strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken satirical bones in it, then you finish over that, and remove that, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceding until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Head chapter.
De restauracio de la ancha.	About the restoration of the narrow passage.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the narrow passages are so fractured, and if they are fractured, then the breakage is only communicated to the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline towards the internal parts; and it causes a bad pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that entrance which is above the fracture, whose shape is that of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is in the extremity of it alone, then you straighten that according to how it appears to you by equalizing the entrance that it may be assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the loin or already declines towards the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on their back with their belly exposed so that it may be prepared for your restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have straightened it, place a plaster cast on it, and also place a splint of wood or of cane, and bind by stricture so that there is no point of fracture nor movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the concavity with water so that it takes the shape according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is a hot abscess, then cease the extension of it and its restoration until the hot abscess is settled, and place water on it that settles according to what has been said; and then return to its restoration, and bind thus with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if they are in the affected bones or are communicated, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter eleven.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	About the restoration of the fracture of the helper.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The helper is that which is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which is that you take a wooden plate instead of a thick groove according to this form.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And tie it with two extremities of two ligaments, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient onto a seat; and then put the broken arm on the wood until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place where it is annexed to the curvature of the wood.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it above some heavy cause or the minister extends it to the lower parts; and then the doctor says that the fracture is in its proper place, until the fracture returns according to what is convenient.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other manner is that the patient is resupinated on their back and suspends the hand of the neck with a ligament; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its proper place; and the other holds it below; and each of them extends to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then bind above the fracture with a ligament and above that with another ligament, and each of the two ministers extends to their two parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And then if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then it is convenient that half of the ligament be placed on the knot and the other below the fracture towards the shoulder blade.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the shoulder blade, then it is convenient that the ligament be placed on that place and on that shoulder blade.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Fill that which is facilitated and its trouble, and then when it will be filled according to what is convenient and it is applied for good application, then bind that if there is no hot abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is a hot abscess, then loosen the stricture until the seventh day, and place on it a warm poultice wrapped in seven layers of oil and rose water until the abscess subsides, and then you bind that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the manner of binding that is to place a plaster cast on the fracture, and then place an envelopment of new cloth around the plaster cast; and then adjust the arm on that helper, and place its hand bent over the shoulder muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and bind around the helper the arm so that the arm is in its proper place of stability, if it does not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stability.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that which places on the fracture that stability which is more firm and stronger than the other stabilities; and place between each stability the width of the finger, and let the length of the stabilites be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from the entire part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then bind around the stabilites with the stricture which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your stricture on the place of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more elongated, the stricture should be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And then if you observe the situation of the stabilites and the stricture thus as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its natural position, then you do.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you suspect an abscessed hip, then you will dissect the structure and the stars within the seventh day, as we have said before.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not become inflamed or infected in the affected area; or it is forbidden to bring food to the member for fear of superfluous structuring; and thus rectify everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Perhaps you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not release the ligature until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their right side, and their other side should be towards the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause on the cotton wool padding full of lanolin application, and consider at any hour of the night or day that the figure of the injured limb is not deformed or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, thus rectify everything according to your true virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the food of the patient according to the order which we have given you, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; and then cover that you thicken the food of theirs.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the adjunct and their leg to be strengthened in 40 days; and then it is fitting that they are released and administered a bath, and thus medicated with unguents which rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is badly damaged, then you do not release the ligament and the stars within a day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm-bones; of which one is small and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small radius, from the part below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it happens that the larger forearm-bone alone is broken, or the smaller one, and it happens that they are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller forearm-bone is broken below, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the forearm-bone of it is broken above the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm-bone below, then it is convenient for the doctor to pause a little extension in order to facilitate the healing of that.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	Perhaps if the larger forearm-bone is the one that is broken, then it is fitting to pause a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forearm-bones are broken together, then it is fitting that you pause the strongest extraction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is fitting that you pause the figure of the hand from the restoration of it and the extension of it extended on a cushion, and let the pulse of the hand be at the parts above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be seated on a wooden chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion placed underneath it in its height or elevation, so that the patient does not incur trouble.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then extend the minister's arm from the affected part downwards to the healthy hand or ligament, and another minister extends similarly from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor reduces the bone into place so that it returns to its best figure as much as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there are splinters, then you must forcibly reduce all the fragments into their place with your true virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears in the separated splinter that holds the cord and does not hope for its restoration, then you finish over it and leave it according to the manner which we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	Perhaps if the fracture is a plague, you have already done it at this singular chapter, and thus take the care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if you suspect an abscessed hip at the beginning of your restoration, then you line up a drap with cerate made of rosated oil and white wax, and it is better between specificity and subtlety, and strengthen the drap over that in a subtle structure until the abscess is calmed; and then remove the cerate and pause to apply a plaster prepared from powder of mulberry on a clear day, and then pause for stars; and let the star be the one that is paused over that fracture more gently and more strongly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of stars on the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one forearm-bone or in both forearm-bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then pause your structure over the place of the fracture more strongly and more vigorously, and when perhaps it will be the extraction at the parts above the fracture or at the parts below it, pause the structure a little while more softly according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the draps that are enveloped over the fracture are very humid draps, and they are not hard nor harsh, and the faith in which it is strengthened is of its own proper middle way between subtle and gross, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Examine the limb and its ligaments for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if you find any cause for which correction is necessary, then proceed with the correction of the limb, and meanwhile prepare a warm compress to apply to the affected area until the correction takes effect.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unconstricted until it rests, and then return the structure to its normal state.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extraction has been softened and the bone has been re-aligned and appears similar to the others, then rectify all that is yours in its virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider that the nutrient is prohibited from reaching the limb due to an excess of structure, because meanwhile you soften it a little and leave it for several days until it can receive the nutrient, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Perhaps if the patient does not find any cause for those things that we have said, then it is not suitable to delay until about 20 days or around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the hand of the patient should be suspended in its virtuous movement, and make it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you will know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or perhaps it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the finger and of the toes.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You will know that the fingers of the hand and the toes are prone to fracture, and they do not receive correction without very gentle and carefully considered movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is a fracture or dislocation in the hand, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a straight and equal direction, and then place their hand on that extension.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and sets them in place, so that they are reunited with good conjunction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is necessary to apply an emplaster and a bandage, if you do not find an abscess or tumor; and then place a star-shaped dressing underneath according to the quantity of the location, and you have already enveloped that in a linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	Perhaps if the bandage is in the divided parts of the belly of the palm, and then make it resemble a spear of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with their wounded palm; then it will be strengthened with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the star-shaped dressing of cloth in which it is elevated, so that the body can be applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Perhaps if the fracture is in the forepart, then it is necessary to place a star-shaped dressing underneath and another on the part below in the palm, so that the hand can be uplifted and straightened; and then place the structure, thus revolving the hand to its natural position among the fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you find a fracture at the knuckle of the toes, then if it is the toe that is affected, it should be set according to what is necessary and then strengthened in the palm, and if you want, place a small, straightened bandage around it so that the fracture is elevated and not dislocated.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Perhaps if the fracture is in the other toes, thus as in that of the middle place, or in the index finger, or in the ear, or in the ring finger, then it should be set and tied to the toe itself; or all the ties are according to continuity, and it is better; or place on top of a small star-shaped dressing, thus as we have said for the toes.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscess or tumor and opposite — in the surgical operation — in what is necessary when you find any cause among those, according to which the narration of it is repeated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fractures of the bone in the hip.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the hip is very fragile and is declared to the sentiment according to which it is converted to the part above and to the upper layer.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Perhaps if it is proposed to the root of the hip, then the ligament is proposed to the dentate at the part of the pelvis, so that the extension remains in its place, and the other ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is proposed to the dentate, then it should be made into a ligament proposed to the dentate, and the extension should be to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor sets the bone in place with both its natural joints so that it is reduced according to its natural semblance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then it is necessary to apply an emplaster and a bandage, if you do not find an abscess or tumor in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	More frequently, it happens in the aposteme (abscess), then you leave it like that for several days until the abscess is drained, and then return to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The treatment of it is done thus: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and double or triple wrap it, and remove the superfluous part; and then cover the leg up to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long filament between the thigh and the leg near the knee, and guide the extremities of the filament to the affected parts below, and then wrap it around the leg and thigh so that it does not slip out of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then stop on the thigh at the place of that fracture thus, and stop one star-shaped bandage over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill in the empty spaces between the leg and the thigh with many folds, so that the extricated structure is consolidated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin a strong treatment on the middle of the affected part with three or four wraps, and as you feel yourself getting better in the alignment of the fracture, your treatment will be less and lighter and more gentle.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the filament to the affected parts below until they reach the heel of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the star-shaped bandages on the other part so that the alignment is not removed from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the treatment on that, so that it does not cause corrosion to the member nor abscess nor inflammation and similar things; and if any of these causes occur, then cut off the defective part, and correct what has been done wrongly, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More often, it happens in the bone where the pain is, then cover what you have wounded according to your ability; and if not, put a dressing on it and leave it, and cure what preceded the memory until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And several times it is strengthened, this fracture of the thigh and other things that are adjusted to the star-shaped bandages, thus as we have said in the adjunct and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	More often in the restoration of it, thus is done so that it does not cause limping to the patient; and if it is restored alone, or another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that it be limped from what was before.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you know that the thigh is strengthened in 10 days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap of the knee.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that a fracture of the kneecap of the knee is difficult to heal, it more often causes many troubles.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	More often it happens to the fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and about that all has been said with the sentiment.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is thus, that it is grafted with what has been broken from its parts, to be joined together as much as possible through equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then stop the plastering and stop on that round star-shaped bandage, if it is needed for that; and strengthen underneath with a suitable treatment.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, thus as abscess and similar things to those in which it is opposed to all accidents with what is convenient for it to be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and it is named fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to some species of fracture that it happens to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason the restoration of it is done thus as the restoration of the arm by grafting, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thin bone is broken, the leg is converted into the lower parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is broken, it affects those below, and it is one of those causes that are not easily amended.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and equilibrium and ligamentation of the stars according to that grafting.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	More often, it happens that if the fracture of the leg is old and has many complications, the extension should be less and lighter, and it alleviates your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you graft the star-shaped bandages and complete all the tie-up operation, then you take measures of wood or pine which are placed below the causes that were placed alone, and make a support of palm branches; remove those from the ones that are small and fragile, and not be heavy on the handles, and let them be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and of the knee up to the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop each drap in two enveloping bandages according to the length of it, and place one on the top of the leg on one side and the other on the bottom of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two stilhes in three places on the extremities and at the middle location, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left sides, and it remains in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then administer a wooden splint according to the length of the leg; and it is placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially be careful that you do not make a fracture, and when you have that plague properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the leg and study it for further study, and you will guard against aposteme and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then you will pause to examine what is happening inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not often suffer a complete fracture; rather the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fragmented fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fractures, and they do not occur unless there is an awkward disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient pauses to place their foot on the ground prepared in this way as an aid.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then pause to place one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then calcify them, and press, and bandage them so that they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and stop above, and place underneath the belly of the foot a small table to which are attached two flat plates.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that around the foot in a descending structure, because you have enveloped that with drapes and other causes among which it is indicated.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you will release the binding, because you will find the bones reunited, or reset, or relocated, and the operation on them is thus successfully concluded.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are reset, then restore them, and bandage them thus as I have instructed you in the restoration of the toes of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the reset toe stilhes according to the length of the toe, and it is placed a little apart from one another; and then place underneath the foot this table that I have recommended to you, and strengthen that around the structure descending.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is reset of the bones is two or three or more, then you place over each toe stilhes according to its quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the plates of the table above the belly of the foot so that it holds with good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which I have told you in the other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and pause to examine every accident so that you may know what is happening inside.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the knee of the woman and of the bone of the penis and of the wound of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the knee of the woman is broken, then make her sit on a chair, and bend it towards the back of the two little ones, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the matron supports the knee from behind, and does it to the knee of hers just as I have spoken; and then the woman is consoled, and raises the back of her little one little by little, because all that is forgotten returns until it is in front of the knee just as I have spoken and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place poultices on the back of hers, and when she wants to urinate, remove the behind of her to facilitate it, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you began at the beginning, and then return to the first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do it thus for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take once a small tube of cane and strengthen it over the thigh of hers with a reed of cane; and insert the whole bladder into her knee, and then inflate through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the knee, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled from behind and stays for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis of the man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and adjustment of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight is not hidden in these fractures, and little happens, mainly to those who are somewhat studious and use and understand my free book; because that fracture indicates to you in the major dispositions via direct methods in the restoration and structure of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the man is afflicted in the groin area because of being wounded, take a poultice of water, and place it on that area; then pause over the wrapped dressing, and let it be enveloped, and then leave it like that for three days or around that time, and he will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are badly bruised.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one to whom a fracture occurs badly bruised, and more so if the bone is large, like the bone of the hip or of the joints, or similar to that, that you take care and fleubotomize as much as possible, according to the conditions of fleubotomy that are suitable for you or testify as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the bruise flows with blood, then it is necessary that you take care of its retention in such a way that you powders above the injured place, if no other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs cautiously, then you delay the restoration of it until the sixth day, until the abscess is discharged, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth, because you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered cartilage, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce it and enclose it with your fingers as much as possible and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared by your fingers as much as possible, then you reduce it with your fingers as much as possible to this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits and the width of which is according to the quantity of the bruise; and for that reason it is necessary for the doctor to take account of these three or four according to the quantity that is indicated by him in the treatment of every kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be rounded, and it should be in a small groove so that it is not doubled over itself during the operation hour.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be of acute extremity to which the margin is in the six extremities; and it should be below it with a thick tendon, tending from the middle towards the divided parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", thus it is a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it is necessary that the extremity of the acute elevated part be paused above the extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and it is enclosed with some equilibrium.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then it is necessary to enclose the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the extremity of the broken bone is subtle, and you do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone in every way that we have recommended, then insert it in a way that is suitable for the instruments which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner it may be possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then scrape off what remains on the bone of roughness and of small, tender scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and then the reduction brings great pain to the patient, vehemently, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer with the patient for great comfort.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed the restoration which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in a sixth steeping of black vinegar, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the bruise or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not become putrid and corrupt.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stelas at the hour of the completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the uncovered bruise in such a way that you insert the bandage with forceps and uses of envelopings according to the quantity of the bruise.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And beware that you do not strengthen the bruise on the fracture, because many vain efforts are made by foolish doctors, and they cause death or corrupting mortality, or sudden death, so it is sanity.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the structure of the tissue is loose, soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the bruise is great or is a bad bruise, and you fear those bad accidents which we have recommended, and it brings pain to the place, then it is not necessary that you pause over those stelas, but rather do that enveloping of harsh dressings in place of stelas and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when one or two days have passed since the bruise began, which has generated a swelling, then you remove from below the dressing which you had placed over it for six days, and then administer cooling remedies, entreating them as we are accustomed to medicate bruises, thus entreating tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is convenient for you to dissolve the ligament and consider the plague in every morning and evening until it becomes consolidated and firm, and see that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus can flow from it to the affected parts easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague does not pass in many days, and it is not consolidated nor has it receded from the arm, then you know that here are stagnations of the humors because the plague attempts to inquire into the plague with tension.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those stagnations, those that are separated remain and are extracted, those that are not separated and put the member in a state of pain, therefore try to incise those according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you find the plague is acidic or ulcerous, it is stubborn, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you know that one of those has been paused which is convenient for him from the cure of which a preceding narration is made in the seventh chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that which you know stays in the worst sermon and you make present your effort: when the bone is crushed, emollients are placed over the member just like the bones of the thigh and of the helper, and it seems similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction from it, nor the extraction of it because four motive veins have been opened for that which causes death; holding back there that enters, because the strong vein perishes if you delay for 20 days or more. And then cure the plague if you have seen it, and if there is not that one.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the cure of nodes that occur in the signs of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many opened nodes occur in the signs of healing of fracture, and mostly because they are close to the joints, and it is ordered by the figure of the member; and strongly prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the node is recent and administer in those medicines that have been stipulated, such as aloen, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar to those; also take some or all of those, and combine them, either stipated, or album of Huou, or agreed, and place it on the node in a stop, and constrict them over it for good consolidation.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the extrication not dissolve for many days; and then extract it and iterate another, until the node is removed; or strengthen over that layer of lead decently, because lead has the property of removing all that which is inflamed in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Maybe the node is already converted into stone and strengthened, and it is necessary to provoke an ostensible contradiction, and then scatter it for the superior part above it, and incise the superfluity and eminence, or root out that with some remedies until it is removed; and cure that until it is sanctified.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fracture when it is restored and then returns the subtle member to its natural freedom according to its own nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of the bone is restored, and then returns the subtle member to its natural freedom, then it is not done except for many causes: of which one is multitude of solution of the ligament and of the bonding not according to what is known; or for superfluity of structure of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the member; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its hour; or for lack of health in the body of the patient and for debilitation of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of that is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender until the health is multiplied in them; and administer bathing; and apply gypsum and lettuce over them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then pause the poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continues to embrocate with water and tepid warmth, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the cure of crushed bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of their own that is known.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it occurs to the member already restored with the healing of its own tortuousness and eminence to the crushed bone and node, and it is for that fed in the form of the member, maybe empowers the member not to be prohibited from its natural operation, then you do not know that you receive the word of one who existed, that member was newly crushed.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Maybe there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done that in our land; and this operation is very detestable, producing great fear of the sign which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Maybe the paralysis and node are recent, then you know that they are embrocated with tepid warmth in which they take mollifying herbs, just like they are fuels of altea and radish of it, and mellilot, and similar to those; and it is done with an emplaster of mollifying emplastering just like Dyallaquilon has done well; or that it takes mucilage of radish of altea and is continued in gray of gualina or oil of cirami, and is emplastered there; or that they take figs grasses and are treated with fems of colom, and similar to those of the medicines that are named Americans consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some remedies are dissolved in a steady friction oil that is among the most humid, and it should be administered with gentle movements of the entire limb at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Perhaps it is twisted and has gone downwards and is made strong and converted into stone and provoked the need for iron therapy, then it is necessary to cover that which has settled above the affected area and the continuity of the bones is dissolved, and it is incised so that what flows from the nodes of those limbs is superfluous, and it is facilitated in that solvent which is stimulated and studied.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On ulcers and dislocations.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is a displacement of some of the joints in their proper place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the shape of the limb is altered, and it brings upon the patient great pains and large lesions.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when accidents happen due to a dislocation, then it is necessary to perform reduction as soon as possible, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes apostemated and very strong, which makes the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is not necessary to massage or stretch at the time of apostema, because many vigorous movements bring about spasms and pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Perhaps when it happens, then it is necessary to apply yourself to the flaccidity of the patient, and then it is laid still so that the apostema relapses; and then the limb is wrapped in hot water and oil, and then it is reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire limb is treated with the water of which the memory will come back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And now I have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So the two jawbones are dislocated if they do not close; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places with little movement, and are softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and complicated, until they are softened at the joint so that corrosive saliva from the patient flows out and cannot hold it nor clear its mouth, and the patient's tongue is enveloped in its speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	Perhaps when the dislocation of it is slight, then in major arrangements it returns by itself for a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	Perhaps if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary to administer reduction of it promptly, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and meanwhile places their finger on the root of the dislocation of the lower jawbone inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or they place both fingers simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are placed above them which are engaged; and commands the patient to stop moving their jaws and releases those from any part; and the minister carefully places the jawbone and wraps it so that it returns to its proper place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jawbones are simultaneously dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both is made easier and does not delay the reduction of both at all, thus as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And thus when they are returned and so wrapped, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then pause on those pillows of drapery with cerote, and it is made of wax and oil rosated; and then it is tied with ease in a gentle manner.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient should sleep on their back, and their head should be positioned between two aurelhes, so that they do not incline to the right or left side; and do not force them to chew anything for a long time; having the healthy diet forbidden, until when the pains are removed and the jawbones are numb, then it is allowed to eat what they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not trouble about the perception of the mouth, unless eating and drinking and citation, until the jawbone is numb and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jawbones is difficult when they are dislocated at any hour and not converted to their proper places, then many vigorous movements happen with fevers and steady soda, and strongly it affects the patient's stomach, and strongly it vomits pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you will know that it is pernicious; and many vigorous deaths occur to the one who suffers from this in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The ankle is not dislocated from the foot because of its continuity with the foot; and some vigorous movements are dislocated at the front part, and this is declared by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then place your hand on the area in your palm with strong pressure, because it will return there.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then put a pause on that plaster and powders and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of one who has seized the hip and is continued in it, not be dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and bandaged according to what we have said and according to your appliance.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then put a pause on that plaster, and powders, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its proper place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the top to the bottom.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and therefore exits at the bottom parts of the thigh, and mostly in those where the flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those where the flesh is thick, it is exited with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often accidents happen to some men through percussion or fall, and the muscle of it is affected by a hot abscess, and it is bruised because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you spread it out so that you are above-mentioned about it, and then you proceed with its cure.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is recognized the dislocation of it when it is at the bottom parts of the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound one, because you find among them manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and below the thigh, from the touch of the head of the muscle as if it were a hollow, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to its proper place, nor can he move at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the foot or above, and then you find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is in a favorable condition.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises his hand to the upper parts; and then he pauses with the toes placed below the thigh, and raises the joint strongly in its proper place, and the minister raises his hand, and extends it there; and then he pauses because it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return for what we have said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurs, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered an embrocation that softens and soothes, as if it were a poultice of altea, and fenugrec, and melillot in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on his back and paused below the thigh, expecting that it will be bandaged between relaxation and constriction, and then the doctor pauses with the hand on the spine, and raises the head of the muscle to its proper place, and releases the hand of the patient so that it is not hidden at the bottom parts, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not hidden at the bottom parts, because it returns quickly to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make a present to a man who has been longer than the patient, and he is on the side of that bed, and he places his hand below the thigh of the patient and raises the thigh of it to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the bottom parts of the back.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is weak, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended, so that they help him, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this way: and it is that it is fixed on the ground a long stick with a rounded figure, like a mortar pestle, which is not large nor subtle, and then it is paused below the patient; because it is paused over the head of the stick, the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and then his hand is extended to the bottom parts of the other side; and his body is extended from the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its proper place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the quantity of which is in the length of two arms, and its width is of four fingers, and its thickness is alleviated on the surface of the thigh according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place above the red cap a sheet of lions' skin, so that it does not touch the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place the patient's little finger, and extend your hand or arm within between the divided parts, and tie the patient's body to the helpers and arms and extremities of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Place your arm on a step of a ladder according to the latitude, and the hand is extended to the divided parts below, and the other thing is suspended from the other side, so that the joint intra is stabilized.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is complete according to whatever manner is possible for you, and then cover that you apply below the little finger a quantity of wool soaked in a mixture of powdered moly and album of water over all the muscle, so that it is revolved from above, and place a strengthening bandage below the little finger with decent structure; and the ligament is revolved over the bandage, and the hand is attached to its neck, and be quiet, and do not move the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And cover that the food of the patient is paused for a little while, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to attend to his health.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food is given in greater quantity around seven or eight, and an exercise of movement is made; and therefore if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healthy.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it is necessary that a cautery be administered there in three tracts, as it has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and seven days are spent loosening the ligament and the joint is not strengthened, and the bandage and structure are reduced on many occasions, and it is not strengthened and cannot be elevated to the above parts, then you will know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already injured or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint at no time will be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation of that which is done from the feet and thigh or the back parts, the reduction is made with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another structure is administered there, and care is taken until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it affects the health of the member and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses many baths until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, especially from the front to the back, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it falls below the vein or below the ligament according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip in the sauce, this is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch that high muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you know that the hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it reaches a chronic apostemation, because if it reaches a chronic apostemation, difficult is its reduction, and hardly is it healed at all; especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is it than all other species of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times it leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that its hand is extended with two fingers, and its arm is expanded, and the fingers of the thigh are above the hip and below it, and the bandage wraps the joint with the toes of its own fingers, or at the base of its palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns also by bending the hand with its own hand, until it strikes the hip at the base of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and very strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is necessary that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that extremity with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then the arm is revolved from all parts, because it is enveloped in a doubled cloth bandage over its hand, or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the thigh touches the joint with its hand, until that oil is applied for so that those causes which help in lubricating the joint are facilitated; and then the joint is strongly bandaged until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of it is seen to be placed on that bandage in which it is stipulated and exception is made with album of water, and is strengthened with decent structure, and the arm is suspended from its neck, and is left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then release it; and so if the joint is formed in that place, then you release the ligament of it and let it be like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint is not strengthening, then you iterate the plaster and ligament, and let it be like that for several days until it is externalized; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Maybe you should add gravity to the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidity in baths and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or pause on the joint alleviated, so it is a motor of great strength; and then release it, and let it be like that over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put it in baths; and when it sweats, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then iterate over that alleviated, so it is rotational of motor, one time, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in immersion of baths, until it is relaxed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, pause on that humid and scaling wound with border and strengthen over that; and do some several times, because it is humid and reduces to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the cure of dislocation of a bruised limb, so it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	A bruised hand sometimes gets dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and conversely it is with other joints, but maybe especially because velocity is needed in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, provided that the place is apostematized or that it falls into an apostematic posture.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the doctor extends the hand of that, and places his hand or his palm over the proximity of the joint, and presses until it returns to its own place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Maybe especially because it is considered if the palm has been opposed to the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is precedent over the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand of that be inherently on the table, so that the doctor's hand fits over that proximity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And then it returns soon, good is; and if not, then strengthen that with an embrocation cedant the apostema and let it be like that; and do not iterate that, because if not, no suffering nor no pressure on the reduction of it, since it will pass in a few days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Maybe the Roman joint is according to its tortuousness; and do not note to the patient any cause, but rather that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are pinched or compressed, and then it is not engendered in it except that it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the sake of its improvement and fortifies that which confers some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the bruise is returned, then pause on the embrocation which we have recommended, and let it be like that for five days; and then release it and let it be like that, and the hand of it should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Maybe if the movement of it is stopped and falls into some gravity, then you lift that with warm water and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the cure of dislocation of the toes.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some times they dislocate the toes completely apart.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a toe is dislocated from among those to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then stretch the toe and press the dislocation of it with the tied poultices, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then sustain the head of the toe, and suspend that from the part where it is dislocated, and let it be like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend that until it is straightened in its own day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to release it in the day and exercise with movement, and lay it at night; and do that for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similarly to that, if it is dislocated to the belly of the hand, and lay it at that part and do that in the first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do that when it is dislocated to other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it falls to one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, a complete dislocation, and so many vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death comes quickly to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And it is said that the evacuation of the patient is out of his will, and cannot retain that; and many times they mollify some members of it or two joints of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many times it is removed and many times it is done, making the removal of that into four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has already been shown in the previous parts and named gelbozitation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Maybe the cure of it is that sometimes they consider if the gelbozitation comes from poverty, because sometimes in that there is no cure nor salvation for all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Maybe in that which is seen through percussion or similar to those, the Ancients already described the manners of cure in a prolix sermon, from which the most returns to profit; maybe you have already experienced relief from that for which little excuse is needed, due to the proximity to the intended meaning, in which they have exposed and formed diverse instruments, with which I will show and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in gelbozitation which comes from the inner part of the foot, there is no ingenuity nor salvation for that; and similarly in that which is made at two joints.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those it is not cured except the one that comes from the back properly, in that which you have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face towards a wall near a partition, and should be extended under the instrument much in order to not hurt their feet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stake should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the wall around the patient's head, and another stake in the air holding their feet on the other side of the wall.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister holds the stake, and it should not be fixed in a ditch; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the patient's head and tie the bandages firmly; extend the extremity of the bandage to the stake which holds the patient's head, and tie it there; and then strengthen the other bandage on their hips, and tie their legs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stake which holds their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should carefully extend the bandage to the part of the stake, and do not disturb the two stakes and the bandages from their proper places where they are fixed, maybe afterwards it will not be firm as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor puts his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he puts them on that one table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Maybe if it does not return by this method, then take a table of which the width or length is in the air of three arms, and carve on the wall where we have said that it is near the patient a place where the extremity of the table enters.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the flat surface of the table on the spine, and the doctor places their feet on the other extremity, and stretches it until the spine is straightened and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, take it to the place which is revolving in the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground near the patient's head at the back of the wall two stakes, the length of which is one arm, and near the patient's head at the back of the wall also two stakes; and let the length be between each stake a palm, and already it is made in each stake a hole in which the rope will turn, and each should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round stake in which the rope turns, and it revolves in the two holes of the two stakes.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the extremity of it there is a hole in which the stake is formed, the length of which is one palm where it revolves; and on the two other stakes it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the bandages that are stretched on the patient's feet at the hole which holds their head, and the bandages that are stretched on their thighs at the rope which holds their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then there should be a rope and a minister who turns the rope with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the rope:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then since the spine is returned, and the place is straightened, then cover that you apply an excruciating plaster of albumen on the patient's back, and then stop; and then put it on the plaster like a table of which the width is three fingers or around that, and its length is as much as takes the place of the gout, and on the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be bound with the bandage that we have said, and use subtle nourishment to heal the patient until they are healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any weakness in the place at the end of the healing, then take care that medicines are administered which mollify and soothe, and administer them on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a thin layer of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some weakened joints come to prominence at the back of the spine of the two, and it is suitable for that dislocation; and it is that bone which already warns you so that you do not try to make a premature recovery with this medicine, because it will strongly harm your attempt to act mortally.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not only dislocate, but also slip out of place, and do not receive those things that they receive from the other small joints with movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, either it is dislocated backwards, or forwards, or downwards, or upwards.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated backwards, and rarely forwards or downwards.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation of it backwards is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy person with the affected leg, it is longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the affected leg cannot bend its knee joint, and it is the place where the knee joint is swollen with a warm apostema, so that the head of the thigh bone has arrived here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which receives a forward dislocation is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that which receives a downward dislocation is that the leg expands according to its natural tendency, but it cannot bend because of the pain in the knee, and if you force it to move and it cannot go upwards; and its urine is retained and its knee joint is swollen, and its walking is difficult on the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that which receives an upward dislocation is that it does not expand the knee, nor can it bend forward, and its leg is shorter than the other, and the knee joint is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is in a different place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and chronic, that it has already become accustomed to having that part, you will administer reduction of it according to its disposition, then it is not in complete cure; and therefore it does not seem suitable for a prompt recovery.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Moreover, in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you will find that you need to return the joint and extend it backwards and forwards, and move it to the right and left, so that it returns to its strength and does not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you prepare a stronger minister and extend the leg from the affected part downwards, or with its own masses, or with the ligament which is tied above the knee; and another minister extends the hand of that one upwards so that it meets its own masses below the nipple; and you strengthen the ligament on the head of the thigh bone, and hold another minister to straighten the extremity of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And its extension is from the ankle to the knee joint at the part of the hip, or from the back to the part of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And its extension is all of those in a single direction until the affected limb is elevated above the level of the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that we speak of regarding proper cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is backwards, it is necessary that the affected limb be resupinated above the level of the lateral thigh; and then pause the ligaments on the head of the thigh bone in that place between the head of the thigh bone and the knee joint below; and then extend the ligament from the part of the knee joint to the most distant part of the hip.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister takes hold of its arms, and embraces the large area of the affected thigh bone and extends to the forward parts by vigorous extension, so that it returns to its original place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of the easiest cure, in which this member is reduced more easily than the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Moreover, if it is exempt from you and does not obey the entrance into this species of cure, then it is necessary that the two feet of the affected person be tied together firmly, lightly, above both ankles and both knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And its length is equal to the quantity of four fingers, and the affected leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the affected limb is suspended above the head of the stick, and it is in a balance; and its length from the ground is a quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to pull the head of the thigh bone, and it is suspended with the affected limb another youth, and the other youth pulls the thigh bone in strength with rapid impulses, so that the joint returns to its original place with velocity.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction proper, when there is dislocation in the affected part beforehand, it happens that the patient's joint adjusts according to how we have recommended to set the limb; and strengthen the ligament over the affected leg properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And place two pillows, one under their feet, and the other at the head; and place adjusted pillows to support the middle of the affected limb over which the humors are enveloped, so that the patient is not bothered by the pillow being between their thighs, so that the extension to the affected parts is not hindered.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends to their own part, and the doctor has his hand engaged in the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey the retraction, it will be great; and if not, pause over that diligently and thus as we have said in the reduction for that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	It happens that the patient's joint adjusts to the healthy sides little by little.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then it happens that the leg is extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative method about the affected limb; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected groin, and then contracts that with his other hand, and in that contraction he pauses the extension to the affected parts downwards to the part of the thigh.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it does not happen that the affected limb is extended to the affected parts downwards, and it is elevated above the ground; however, it happens that it is placed on a hard surface, thus as it happens with the reduction if their ankle is dislocated beforehand, according to what we have said about its placement on two anchors; and it is above its face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no danger.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it happens that an administered compression bandage is placed on the area where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, since the reduction is completed as it happens — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the affected limb, and when you see those joints and the affected limb stretches out the healthy leg and expands its excuse, then you know that the member has returned as it happens — and then you adjust both thighs and place a bandage around them so that the ankle is not hidden in any of the parts; and adhere the affected limb to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then release the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those joints in their proper place, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and thus the affected limb can walk again.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and plaster it, and stretch it according to its first structure, and thus it will be in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release it, and make it delay in walking about for some days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the cure of dislocation of the thigh.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thigh is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated to the anterior parts, and to the posterior parts, and sometimes to the upper parts and sometimes to the lower parts; and to the anterior parts it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the affected limb to apply its leg to the thigh; then you know that the thigh is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the affected limb straight, thus that it extends the healthy leg, if possible; tie two towels to the face of it, and place its foot between the two towels; and then make adhere the thigh of it with your two palms, and hold them together with the two towels on the thigh of it in strength, and another minister extends the healthy foot until the thigh returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction of it is that its leg adheres to the thigh without labor or effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster it and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the affected limb for walking for some days, until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	It happens that if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the ligaments which are in the cure of the preceding narrative about the ankle.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the cure of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some ankle joints are removed by small movement, and some joints are dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either in the posterior parts or in the anterior parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The healing of the patient's dislocation is often a long process, and it is necessary to extend and facilitate the hands so that they can be restored inward.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	Sometimes in the healing of one who is dislocated according to a compliment, it happens that you make the patient straight, and hold that strong and valiant minister behind the back of that person in the middle place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you put your right hand on the straight foot above the ankle, and your left hand below the foot at the place of the calf.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then you draw the foot to your right hand, and then with your left hand for two fingers, and then extend your left hand; and you press the toes of the foot against the leg, just above the knee.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make two fingers according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then you press the toes of the foot against the leg at the third finger, and you are at the calf.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns to one finger or two according to this method, and if you can straighten the foot, it's good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because that will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Sometimes if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then make the patient sit on their back on the ground, and stretch a strong bandage tightly around them, and enclose it between the thighs of the patient, and you have already enveloped them in a sheet so that they do not move.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or wraps it around the neck of the foot; and then extend that same minister against the extension of the back, and the bandage is extended between the thighs of the patient, holding it, so that the body of the patient is not attracted to the lower parts below its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor straightens the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, because the dislocation returns to its facility.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the healthiness of the reduction of it, then pause the plaster and stretch that strongly with a bandage, and bind the foot to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware that you do not touch or guard the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the bandage on it is not violent and holds it firmly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage is softened, stretch it out.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove it on the third day or fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Sometimes if you are forced to delay in that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation does not dissolve and corrupt, and then that which does not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you happen to find the apostema cautious, then beware that you administer in the sedation of it, which our narrative has preceded, in another place of cure and of embracement, until it is restored.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the Healing of Dislocation of the Toes of the Feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It happens that one who is dislocated can be straightened with little extension of their efforts; and that which is not difficult, therefore it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	Sometimes if the dislocation is in some nodes of the foot, then beware that you make the patient sit on their back on a flat surface or on a table, and it should be still like that as if it were normal.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on feet, and pause the foot on what you imagine to be the joints, and then calcify that in the foot as it turns until it returns, and you see that it is already straightened and does not appear in the eminent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then pause below the belly of the foot on a table that holds the whole foot, which has two cups, and then strengthen it in a decent structure and hold it firm for three days; and then remove it and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the Species of Dislocation that are Made by Wound or Fracture or any other Accidents.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you encounter some cause of those, and you fail in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many fingers succeed in death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that you do not know that about the cure of it, except he who is wise in the art, from long usage, merciful and pitiful, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses in the commencement of medicines that cast out apostemes so much alone, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but hopes for salvation from perdition, with alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then it is necessary to proceed so much from the reduction in the commencement of the cause, because it will encounter a cautious aposteme.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns according to what we will, then administer a regimen that casts out cautious aposteme and cures the wound with what is convenient for it from the dry desiccations.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if a dislocation is caused by a fracture and separation of the sacrum bone, then you perforate the statement of theirs, and do so in such a way that it has been said in simple gout cases that it precedes in those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to what has preceded my predication; for it is better for you to give thanks to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your body very truly at that time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus the paragraphs of Albucasim are perfectly filled with those which God may bless.
Amen.	Amen.
