Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The words of Albuquisim begin here.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh sons, I have now completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, because its conclusion was reached through him, and through his explanations, and through his declarations, it seems to me that you will be able to complete that which belongs to you in this treatise, which is a part of my operation, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since my operation is now obsolete in our region and in our time, completely private within itself, except that a little bit of science remains, and the vestiges remain, but there are no more than some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed the most and deviated into those errors and aberrations, until the intentions of it are closed and the force of it is elongated and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you revitalize that ancient order of this treatise through the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because I added the forms of instruments such as cauterizers and other tools of the work for the purpose of supplementation of declaration, and preparation for use, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	However, the reason why a good craftsman cannot be found with his own hand in our present time is because the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy which was known by Galen so that he could know the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their arrangement; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their effusion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore Hippocrates says that a name is a mere sound, but in the work small, and most of all in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said that about him in the introduction to this book; because whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not be spared from falling into error, by which men will die, just as I have seen many of them, since some are formed in this science and take themselves for experts without knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because you saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had inserted an abscess on the throat of a woman, and had cut some arteries in the throat so that a great deal of blood flowed, and the woman died between the others.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who, without realizing it, pulled out a gallstone from a man who had already developed an illness in his condition, and the gallstone was large, and he brought it to him and left that gallstone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died three days later.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you had already asked to remove it, and I saw that because of the size of the gallstone and the condition of the patient, one could infer that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he set to work on a blacksmith's Negro who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor, with his ignorance, removed the fracture, on top of the wound, with pulleys and stays with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he bound it according to his desires, and then he re-laced it, and then he let it stay for some days and commanded that we loosen the bandage; and it became such that the thigh and leg were gangrened, and it led to destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you were called to him, and we loosened the bandage, and subsequently he experienced calmness and alleviation from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But meanwhile corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained, and did not cease to spread corruption in the member until the patient peril.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who opened up a cancerous abscess and had it ulcerated about four days later, until the great evil of his patient's lordship was revealed.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which is because the cancerous abscess is pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not need to come to him with force from all sides, but rather be in a member which suffered as if it was being hosted.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that my operation be divided into two parts: one being the operation associated with health, and another being the work in which there is danger in the greater dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in every place of this book where the operation is in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that aside, so that foolish people do not find a way to speak and to deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way with the grace of God and persevere in losing one's life and gaining a glorious succession, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and keep your arms from this which makes you fear, so that your station remains in your faith and in your name, lest it escapes: for it is more remaining at your glory, and more so in the world and in the end to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen has said in some of his own writings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not medicate bad diseases, lest bad doctors be unnamed".
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter arranged from head to foot, in the forms of instruments and in the ironworks of cauterizers, and from what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on cicatrization and perforation, and on cupping, and on wounds, and on the extraction of splinters and similar things to those, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and relocation, and on the cure of torticollis and similar things to those; chapter ordered from head to foot, and in the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauterizers with fire and acute medicine, and remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of this entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	You should know what kind of joints that cauterizer is suited for and which ones it is not suitable for, and in what condition it should be prohibited to use.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So I say that the sermon on the quality of the joint of cauterizer and its necessity is a long and prolix one, subtle by science, and secret hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and to me it suffices to share a small part of their sermons, fearing prolivity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that cauterizer is suitable for every universal condition that is in material or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions where the material is lacking.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and parched condition with material that dries out; for some will say that cauterizer is helpful in this case, while others will say the opposite of this, that cauterizer is not suitable for a disease that is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be inconvenient to apply heat and dryness to a dry and parched condition.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite of this will say that by cauterizer it is made to join together in all dry and parched diseases that are found in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its moistures to the condition of fire, you find the body of man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by this sermon that I have experimented with it many times to discover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not think it necessary to repeat what has already been explored and exercised in the chapter on cauterizing by last exercise, and to be familiar with the diversity of human conditions and the disposition of diseases in their respective cases, and the causes of those, and the accidents that occur in them, and the space of time that those take.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other conditions, there is no fear for you, and especially in cold and humid diseases, since all doctors have agreed on those, and are not discordant in the joining of cauterizing in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that from the secret of cure by cauterizing with fire and its goodness, so much is said about cauterizing with medicine, it is because fire is simple, whose action only reaches the member being cauterized and does not harm another member adjusted to it except for a small disturbance.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of medicine combined reaches that member which is distant from it, and very easily brings illness to the affected member with difficult healing and often stays.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, by its subtlety and good substance, does nothing more than to superfluously add. Already we have known through experiment and long service of study in the art over the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of this sermon. And if it were not that the secret hidden with the fire is not read well in this pause to you, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, with a philosophical demonstration sermon, which would be sharp in your breasts.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree on the time when it is suitable to perform cauterizing and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterizing is suitable at any time, because the harm caused by the timing of an accident is submerged in the joining of what attracts to cauterizing, and most especially if the cauterizing is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fierce, which do not suffer delay for fear of those that would bring malice, which is greater than a small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus it does not occur in your minds, or sons, that this is not esteemed except by the common folk and foolish doctors, so that for that disease which is cured by cauterizing, there is no reduction of time, and pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus as they say for that reason, because cauterizing is only a place of medicine which alters the condition and dries out the humors which are the cause why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But in any case, cauterizing is superfluous over medicine due to the desire for its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that its disease may return at some hour of time, according to the condition of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluous things, and what is arrived at him in his acquisition through foods and similar causes; unless the disease for which cauterizing is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluous things and humors, such as a tooth cauterization for pain and similar cases, it is possible that it will not return to him, but rather it will be reduced to smallness.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is also said that cauterizing is the last resort of medicine, and it is a sermon of desperation, not because I understand what they mean in that, for I believe that there is no cure that profits through medicine or any other cause approaching cauterizing.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that cauterizing is the last resort of medicine not just when we administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and it approaches the end of the cause, then one administers cauterizing, and profits from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And hours ago, I said that cauterizing is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding which I understand from the common people and the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterizing with gold is better than cauterizing with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and its subtlety.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cauterizing does not take away from it, as this is not absolutely true, for I have already experienced and discovered that it does not do so except in certain bodies where others are not, and cauterizing with gold is good and better than with iron as they say; but when you do cauterizing with fire using gold, it is not declared to you, because it is hidden according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you place upon it ignition so that the gold melts by the fire, and case in the fire some plates so that the craftsman can see through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore it is made to cauterize with iron, that we may proceed more lightly and more promptly to the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterizing according to chapters, and arranged those from head to foot, in order that the one demanding this may easily find what they want.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On Cauterizing of Headache due to Frigidity and Humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The First Chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterizing refers to the humidity and frigidity on the serving of the accident which is caused by two causes, one being the cause of soda and the other being the multitude of raumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parties of the eyes and ears flowing, and the multitude of sleepiness, and pain in the teeth and the throat, and universally all disease that comes through frigidity, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar ones in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterizing is this: first, I command the patient to be purged with medicine lactative in the head, for three or four nights, according to what is required by the virtue of the patient and their age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and have him sit between two mats on a well-cushioned bench, and let his mats rest on his own feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the razor's edge on your palm near the nose between their eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But since the time has come as you said, mark that place with a tent, and then light the cauterizing oil of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place it on that marked spot with the tent, in a way that descends, so that your hand is gradually constrained little by little, and you revolve it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and gaze at the spot, and if you see that some quantity of bone has been revealed, like the amount of grain of errors, hours elevate your hand, and if it does not return to its original position with that iron, but rather becomes frigidated, until what I have told you is visible to the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the spot, and let it stay for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place it on the wound that is covered with border and let it stay on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the spot with four-herb ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that as long as the wound remains open, so much the better it gets, for it is better and more healing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the cauterized part should be cauterized to the bone, and held in place until some part of the specificity of the bone is absorbed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it should be razed what has been adjusted to the bone, and then it should be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cauterizing it should come to an end, and then it should press strongly into the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little alphecati.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that spot the vapors of the head will evaporate.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the open wound should be kept for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But to me, it is not visible in these two species of cauterizing at all, except in some men according to the way of fear; and I leave that, you should know, better for health when it is so; because the head has been developed by the solution of continuity there, just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a frigid nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cauterizing is more saved and better, according to my judgment; and from that house and with that work, there is health.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On Cauterizing of the Head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head in a patient who is prolonged, and uses various remedies such as plasters, poultices, ointments, powders, and balms, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cauterizing which does not benefit him at all, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and since it is not frigid and finds no great relief, then cauterize another cauterizing over that little bit.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize it on the horn of his head with a cauterizing until the bone is split apart.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and uncover the quantity of bone that we have described, and then cauterize it with a cauterizing in the rear part of the head at the location called "vas", which is the place where the wind blows.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And raise your hand in this way, and do not uncover the bone, for the patient by doing so will experience a great deal of pain different from the pain of all other cauterizations on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should say this cauterizing in its place, for it is necessary that the cauterizing which cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtle than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Fourth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Cauterizing of Old Hiccups.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is dull pain in the head or it spreads to the eye, and medicine lactative has been purged, and another cure has been administered, which I have described in the divisions of diseases; and all does not benefit, then cauterizing in two ways: either with medicinal acuteness combined, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cauterizing with medicinal acuteness is when you take a piece of aloes, scrape it and cut off the extremities from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then make an incision in the place of pain on the temple with a well-sharpened lancet until it makes a spot below the bone, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then press strongly on it with a stopper to prevent further constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove the aloes, treat the wound, and let it stay for two or three days, and then place on it a poultice submerged in border until the spot becomes healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do the same with some medicinal combinations which I have written in the two treatises on medicinal combinations.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterizing with iron according to this manner: ignite by fire of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a shape of a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the spot of pain, and hold your hand steady - so that the arrowhead is not absorbed by the surrounding tissue - and rotate the iron slowly little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of blood that is absorbed by the specificity of the bone is as much as the majority of it, and lift your hand for fear that the artery which is left behind will not be absorbed, so that no flow of blood comes forth.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak the cloth in saltwater and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; and then change the cloth with border, and then cure with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize with the edge of the cutlery according to the cauterizing, and beware of cutting into the artery in this old hiccup properly.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On Cauterizing of Old Hiccups Properly.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure emigranea with what we have said about the previous cure and what we have described in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not benefit and sometimes the disease is so severe that it does not respond to what we have said about the first cauterizing with medicine or with fire, then you must ignite the cutlery cauterization until it is whitened, because it means on the spot of pain with a line of length which is most of the digit, or whatever; and hold your hand steady for one moment and press strongly there until the artery is incised and reaches the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be mindful of the continuation of the jawbone, which is damaged by mastication, and that the ligament not be absorbed and the nerves which are affected by this, and that there be no spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is severed, for in the severing of it there is fear, and especially for him who is ignorant of what he does and has not studied or practiced; and leave the operation at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find it in the memory of the regimen of accidental bleeding from the artery according to its own manner, in its own place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cauterizing and see the patient's body is tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head just as we have described, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cauterizing which we have described in the chapter on stretching of artery with two cloths, and it is better this cauterizing and more relevant.
Capitol .v.	Fifth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On Cauterizing of Earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is cured with lactative causes and with another cure which I have described in the division, and the pain does not subside, then ignite the cauterizing, and this is the one called "puncta", of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then make the puncta approach the ignition, and be brought to the surroundings of all the ear as a wheel is revolved, or in the circle of each example if the pain is in each.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Draw out the cauterizing from the root of the ear little by little until you have marked the spot with intent.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterizing is applied to all the points in the entire ear, and those places, and then cure them until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On Cauterizing of Torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and by cauterizing there is only of the species that come through flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterizing the species which occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of torture with jarrings and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and your cure does not conform, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little behind the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cauterization on the contrary side of the affected part, for softening does not come except in the part that appears to be healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterizing on the right side of the extremity of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb's tip, and hold your hand with the cauterizing until the quantity of the majority of the bone's specificity is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauterizing, and it is a type of cutlery, the shape of which is before the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But even more subtle is that which you see a little, and it is necessary to temper in it a little of superfluous grossness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the spot with this water which is before processed until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On Cauterizing of Old Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you cure it with what we have said and your medicine does not conform and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauterizations: on all the horns of his head; and with cauterization in the middle part of the head, just as we have said; and with cauterization in the back of the head.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cauterizing is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then be cured with water that is processed.
Capitol .viii.	Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On Cauterizing of Oblivion caused by Flux.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary that the patient be given in the beginning large jarrings and pills of purgative medicine.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the head of the patient and place on it an ointment described in the treatise on ointments, on the back of the head.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause for a few moments, because that is the manner of cauterizing.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do so according to the order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And then if he is healed by that; and otherwise, then do three cauterizations in the back part of his head, which are descendants from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cauterization the length of the finger, and then cure with water that has been processed.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to add more and the patient is tolerant, then do the cauterization in the middle part; and if you wish to add even more, then cauterize that on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And then cure that until it is healed; and be the olive cauterization according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Ninth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On Cauterizing of Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It is necessary that you process in the softening of the head with jarrings and with water as we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with cauterization in the middle part of the head, and with cauterization on all the horns of the head, and with cauterization on the back part of the neck, and with three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body for many and the patients are tolerant, and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and gradually with cauterization until it is consumed by the bone's motion, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that until it is healed, and this be olive cauterizing.
Capitol .x.	Tenth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On Cauterizing of Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized the epiletic, but that epilepsy is caused by flux.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore it is necessary to soften the brain at first with jarrings and with other cure which we have described in the division when the patient is great and the exception of medicines is tolerated.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarismes and mastiguation with purgative medicine, for four days in advance, with good provision of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with one cauterization in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cauterization on the back of the neck, and on each horn of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and is tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauterizations which I say, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And be the olive cauterizing according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause with subtle cauterization according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Eleventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterizing of Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are humid and corrupted flux, then cauterize that with the cauterizations which we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that softens the brain according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a turban decently made from it over the circle, and then place that in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient shall be kept seated comfortably, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then pause with a liniment; and it is more worthy of an ancient border of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with gentle heat, measured by measure, which the patient suffered when it was most in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle part of the head of him in the circle, and let it be there until it is warmed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient for one week at a time, with another regimen of good medicine until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to what is most of it, but keep your hand with a cauterization thus ordered: this is a species of cauterizing which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then pause that covered in beggar's cloth or in grayish gallinaceous (i.e., old hen) skin.
Capitol .xii.	Twelfth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On Cauterizing of Water Descending into the Womb.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are declared the beginning of water in the womb by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens the head of him, and keep that from all humidities.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sweat in a bath in the degree for some days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with cauterization in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauterizations on both temples if it is the beginning of water in two wombs, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one womb.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with the cauterizer all the veins and arteries which are left by the bone; and let the cauterizations be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of fluxes of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see from him fluxes of blood, stop it with some medicine which is to your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will come to wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries and in the absorption of those and caution regarding fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the cervical vertebrae left between two bones with two cauterizations produced gradually.
Capitol .xiii.	Thirteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On Cauterizing of Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the womb are old and superfluous, and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is a flux of cold and humid fluid, then cauterize that with the cauterization which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water flowing into the womb, and with cauterization in the middle part of the head, and with two cauterizations on the cervical vertebrae left between two temples, and with two cauterizations on the cervical vertebrae left between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need addition, then cauterize that on the entire back of the womb over the extremity of the forehead with a small cauterization.
Capitol .xiiii.	Fourteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On Cauterizing of Stench from the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate that with water as we have said in the division and your medicine does not benefit, then prepare and give to drink to the patient cockroaches for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize it with a gentle olive cauterization.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a clove cauterization and two cauterizations on both sides of the forehead, just above the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware not to cut into the artery that you find.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the clove cauterization, this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Fifteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauterizing of Softening of Eyelids of the Womb.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the womb is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with one cauterization with this lunar cauterization; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, then cauterize that on both sides a little above the eyebrows with two cauterizations in all parts, and be extended from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cauterization be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterizer, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is absorbed.
Capitol .xvi.	Sixteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On Cauterizing of the Eyelid of the Womb When the Hairs are Converted to the Inner Parts and Punch the Womb.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the womb are converted to the inner parts in such a way that they punch the womb, then cauterize those in two ways, either by fire or by medicine which is complementary.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If by cauterization of fire, command the patient before that they may comb their own hairs as if they were making them smooth, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if you punch that, then you should bind the womb with a bandage so that it is not harmed until the hairs are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, pause the head of the patient in your seat, and then sign on the eyelid of the womb with a tent, with a signal which is according to the figure of a mullein leaf, and be the beginning of the signal near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then pause with a cloth wrapped in almond oil or mucus from papyrus over the womb.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cauterization which this is the form of it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the figure which you have signed, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the bone is burned like a mullein leaf, all appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health for this work is that you see the eyelid of the womb already contracted and the hairs of it elevated above the puncture of the womb.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then elevate your hand and leave that for three days, and then pause with a cloth wrapped in borders until the scar is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if some cause returns to the hairs and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cauterization on that just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are left in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the hairs do not harm the womb.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cauterization with complementary medicine is that you command the patient to comb their hairs until they are prolonged and equalized, and then make a bandage like a mullein leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take a known saponin and a living cause of an inch. The end. And thus, and then mix those causes well, and make this with a feast for so that it is not warmed; and then spread that water on the bandage which is made like the form of a mullein leaf, and pause that over one womb or both; and pause below the womb cloth wrapped in almond oil, and the head of the patient be in your seat.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then pause the said thing on the medicine and press that a little and not harm it until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for sting is in him like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then, when the patient perceives that he feels the sting of the medicine, pause and say to him "Be quiet" and do not harm it until the sting ceases; and then, when the sting ceases, rinse the womb with water; and then consider if the eyelid has already been lifted like it is washed away by fire or incision, for then you are well; and if not, return to that medicine on the location where you did not apply the medicine and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and the womb is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause with a cloth wrapped in borders until the scar of adjustment is eradicated, and then cure that with an ointment or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to diligently watch over your operation so that no residue of the medicine falls into the womb, and if the eyelid becomes softened after some days and any cause of the hairs hurts the womb, then repeat your medicine on that location where the eyelid has become softened, and do it in the same way as at the beginning, and guide it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of mullein leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the wombs of men are diversified according to their magnitude and smallness, and therefore, according to this, is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let not the way of rightness be hidden from him who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Seventeenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On Cauterizing of Fistula that is in the Lacrimal of the Womb.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with water as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer your cure, then command that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to pause their head in your seat, and hold the head of them with some attendant between your thighs in such a way that it is not harmed nor agitated with their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then pause with a cloth wrapped in almond oil or mucus from papyrus over the womb of it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cauterization which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	...which shall be curved, like the shape of a cane or a pheasant's tail, from one end to which is made the cauterization.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it shall penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, let it be so as a signal.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But in any case, that which is curved is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out pus and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the tumor from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then pause with the cauterization which is well ignited, and take with that your hand a little bit to apply the cauterization to the womb at the parting of the nose, so that you do not err or disturb the patient, and then pause the cauterization in the gray matter of the womb and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then if at the beginning of your cauterization it enters into the bone, that is good; and otherwise, then repeat the cauterization one or two times as needed; and leave that so for three days, and then pause with a cloth wrapped in borders and surround it with an ointment to dry until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it is passed eleven days and not healed, then pause with sharp and corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and shaved according to what is suitable in your own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some first doctors said: insert the instrument into the location of the fistula and then pause in that subtle fissure, which is the form of it: And pour into that the quantity of one inch of melted lead; and take your hand with a camel with good retention, and do not let the patient be harmed because the melted lead may penetrate to the womb of him; and pause over the womb of the patient with a cloth wrapped in almond oil or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with the water that we have said about cauterizing and curing, that is good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to administer a blow through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its own place.
Capitol .xviii.	Eighteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On Cauterizing of the Wound of the Paps.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times these fissures occur in the lips, and most especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then when you cure those fissures with water as we have said in the divisions and your cure does not take effect, then ignite the cauterization with a small knife according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And be the curvature of it according to the subtlety of a cuttlebone.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And then pause that instrument carefully in those fissures until the cauterization reaches the root of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Nineteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On Cauterizing of Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth an apostema forms and begins to break, is broken, and becomes antiquated, and a fistula is formed, and you cure it but your cure does not take effect, then it is necessary that you ignite a cauterization according to the quantity received in the fistula, and then insert that ignited instrument into the track of the fistula, and take your hand until the hot iron reaches the root of it, and at the end of it do so one or two times; and then cure it with water as we have said about curing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And then if the pus is discharged and it is healed, that is good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to uncover the location and expose the corrupted bone according to what will come in its own chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Twentieth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On Cauterizing of the Teeth and Softening of the Gingivae.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gingivae are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you cure them with medicines but they do not confer, then pause the head of the patient in your seat, and then ignite the cauterization which will come to this, so that you pause the quantity on the tooth and insert into it the ignited cauterization hastily, and take your hand a little bit until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cauterization several times according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient will open their mouth with water of salt and hold it for an hour, and afterwards stop it, because the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gingivae are strengthened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Twenty-First Chapter.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On Cauterizing of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or the tooth is cold or warm, and your cure with medicine does not confer, then cauterize in that location according to two ways: either cauterize with a border of oxen, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauteri with border is that you take the border of oxen and boil it in a cauldron of iron, and then take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the tent, and then immerse that in boiling border, and pause that over the toothache festinatingly until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the border as said above, and pause that over the aching tooth, and pause on top of that iron ignited until the iron reaches to the root of the curvature of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But in any case, the cauterization with fire is that you attend to the quantity of iron or steel, and be in the core of it some roughness, and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cauterization according to its form, and pause that over the tooth and take your hand until the cauterization is cooled; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved or in one day or another.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good border and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as you wish, with whatever instrument or method you can use.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cauterizing instrument:
Capitol .xxii.	Twenty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterizing of Exostoses.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When exostoses are of flesh and humors that are cold and not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you wish the digestion of those slightly, then you ignite the cauterization with a curved shape according to this form, having two extremities humps for the smoke of the cauterization to escape through one side, and pause that ignited instrument on that apostema once, and another if it is needed of that, until it reaches the root of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then pause the cauterization according to the quantity of the apostema, and then leave it for three days and pause over it with a cloth wrapped in borders until what the fire has burned off is relieved.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment, poultices, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cauterizing instrument or of the two cauterizations to such is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Twenty-Third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Cauterizing of Aphonia of the Voice and Constriction of the Larynx.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities come over the quantity of the lung, and most especially when this is due to coldness of constriction, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with medicines laxative, and then cauterize that in the root of the throat in the location affected.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And take care not to reach with the cauterization to the larynx nor burn the cord of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And then cauterize that with another cauterization at the junction of the vertebrae in the last thoracic spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cauterization of it shall be like a key, as previously said.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with water as preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Cauterizing of Lung Disease and Cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are of cold humidities, and the patient has no fever nor hiccup, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauterizations on the furcula in the affected locations; and with another cauterization in the middle location of the chest between two nipples; and let the cauterization be like a key according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make your cauterization punctate with the cauteries that are called puncture, the form of which precedes in the puncturing of earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points into those; and then cure that with water, applying as preceded until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauteries have three ramps, where cauterization is in that: in one go, you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On Cauterizing of Tittil, which is the Head of the Assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricating humidities and is not fixed in its return movement, and it becomes dislocated again as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the dislocation, and then the patient shall be reversed onto their back or side; and then elevate the cord which is in the departure from behind the citillic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated from behind.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery with two heads; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cord until it penetrates that into another side; and the figure of cauterization will be like this, when there are five cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so those subtleties according to the quantity of the tent; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some times it is adjusted according to this count, because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cautery with pores full of salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the member not be decayed for any time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and there is no remedy, then cauterize over the muscle with a cauterization like a key or with multiple punctate cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is dried up and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterizing of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and many humidities come into the stomach, and it is thrown out of its composition and becomes multiple rumblings in it, and if you continue with the methods of curing and do not concur, then it is necessary that the patient be turned onto their back and stretched out their arms and legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one on the chest for the quantity of a finger with a key-shaped cautery, and two on both sides of the cautery, so that the figure of triangular cautery appears; and elongate between them so that they are not adjusted to cause pressure.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be one cautery according to the form of a circle, according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctured with that which is frightened of this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach point according to the quantity you want in tent, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then cure that with the curing that preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On Cauterizing of the Fettered Foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the pain is in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive ventosity, and it has departed from its normal composition by superfluous egression, and the patient is cured with water as we have said but does not concur, then it is necessary that the patient be turned onto their back and stretched out their arms and legs, and sense three cauteries according to this form and quantity on the foot behind the hip bones, so that it reaches the position of a man lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of a straight arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress your hand with the cauterous motion.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the majority of the cord's thickness, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, which has stretched out its legs, and raised its arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, when it is according to your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And take care that you do not proceed too quickly in the cauterization, and be careful with the subtlety of all the cord so that it is absorbed throughout the body and reaches into the vessels, for this cord here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On Perforation of the Aposteme of the Foot with a Cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an aposteme or excrescence on the foot and you wish to know if that aposteme is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will be afflicted with gravity and pain with no acuteness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then with great pain and many times that will fatigue even the doctors to cure it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto their back on the pillow; and then sense the location of the aposteme with tentation; and then ignite the cautery which is similar to rag, the form of which has preceded in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize with that same cautery until all the cord is consumed, until it reaches the ciphac, until in such a way that health may ensue.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with the curing of other apostemes until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary that one use this form of cautery except for the one who has studied in the art of medicine and has prolonged it, and whose many maladies have known; but this one may be bold at times on this operation, yet always heed the warning and it will be better.
Capitol .xxix.	Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cauterizing of Pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology have declared that for pleurisy, it is necessary to cauterize according to this manner, and this is what you take from the roots of aristology, a long dry root that is found, and it is of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge that in oil and ignite it at the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone; and with two small cauteries guided by that, one slightly declining towards the party that is below the beard, and with two cauteries on that part that declines between the fifth rib and the navel, declining slightly to the parts behind; and with another cautery in the middle location of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries from behind; and with one cautery in that location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries from both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary that you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifestation of the cord in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already the ancient ones have said that some of the men who used iron cautery like a ray and ignited it, and put it in that location which is between the ribs, until it reaches that aposteme and healthiness is promoted, just as we have said in the aposteme of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for as it happens soon after the location of fistula to which there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Thirty-First Chapter.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On Cauterizing of the Melancholy.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the disease of melancholy with water as we have said in the division and do not concur with your curing, then cauterize there according to three manners, all of which are right, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melancholy, following the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the same manner which we have said in the cauteries of the foot, equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand with the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another manner of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery having two handles, which cause we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the cord which is in the end of the melancholy, where it reaches the bed of the patient's left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And be your elevation according to which you elevate the cord as long as the body is, so that you may make cauteries according to the latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two handles, ignite one, and enter into that which with those you will pierce the cord from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three handles.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery more than I have said to get it out for too many days, because it is more certain that other causes preceding in the curing.
Capitol .xxxi.	Thirty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Cauterizing of Hydropepticus.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not used in hydropepticus, but rather in acute properment.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydropepticus with the manners of curing which we have said in the division and do not concur with your curing, then it is necessary that one cauterizes with four cauteries in the circle of the navel and with one cautery on the stomach, and with another cautery on the foot, and with another cautery on the melancholy, and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and with one cautery in the right side of the foot, and with another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportioned to the subtlety of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery under for so that it gets out slowly over a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from curing immediately after the cautery with water as is necessary for two intentions, and thus it will be hastened to him with the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is like a key according to the previous form above, and it is that with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Thirty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Cauterizing of Feet and Limbs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostemated in dropsy and filled with sitten water, it is necessary that you cauterize the feet on the top of the heel with a cautery that is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return to it completely, for the sitten water resists.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is according to this form: And then make two cauteries on each limb, and in each limb be made a cautery at the extremity of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And be the cauteries according to the length of the limb: one below the knuckle and another below the middle part of the limb; and on each limb, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open without cure for a long time in order that some water may flow from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure it with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Thirty-Third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Cauterizing of Belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is weakened by cold and humidity to such an extent that it loses its virtues, namely the digestive and retentive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with water as we have said in the curing methods, but does not concur, and at times the patient suffers from a cauterization of virtue exhibiting, then cauterize that with a great cautery on the natural stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circle cautery and four subtle cauteries in the circle of the navel, with a key-shaped cautery; and with another cautery over the loin over aloes granules, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if at times excessive humidity and the patient's water tolerates, then cauterize that on the intestines and over the intestines, and slightly adjusting two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for it is perfect curing of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On Cauterizing of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When such old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors or corrupted humidity are in nature and are cured with water as we have said in the division, but do not concur with your curing, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left behind from the vertebrae of the little back and triangular, and with a cautery above the navel that falls between two ditties.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the stomach of him is enfeebled and his food not digested, and his face at times apostemated, then cauterize that on the stomach with a great cautery according to what has preceded; and with one cautery on the foot, and with another cautery on the melancholy of him with a key-shaped cautery; and leave the cautery open for some time, and then cure him until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On Cauterizing of Athies Properly for their Abscission.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you abscess the athies, then ignite the cautery which is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited cautery into the abscessed athie, and lastly extend your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make it once or twice, for if the athies are too many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with water that concurs with their wounds until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a great cautery on something, it is more certain in judgment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On Cauterizing of Fistulas that are formed in the natural parts of him.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when you find some fistula in the natural parts of him, and it is old, rotten blood and corrupted humidity are flowing from it, and thus what is most worthy to be done is that you probe that with a subtle tent and know the quantity of the depth of it with the aforementioned tent.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery which is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the tent enters.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted bodies are consumed in one, two, or three passes, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And take care not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or intestines, then take care of all those places; and do not do so unless the fistula is in a fleshly location and you are certain that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and all the matters have abscessed from it, and thus remains for a long time, then know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not removed from him, then know that it is penetrating or into the preone of him or corrupting his flesh, or that there will be remembrance of those causes in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On Cauterizing the Tonsils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the tonsils there is great pain due to cold or gross ventosity, and because of this the patient's throat is sore, then it is necessary that you cauterize that on each tonsil with a key-shaped cautery, of which the remembrance precedes.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And then cauterize with a little more, so that three lined cauteries will be made, and thus they will be more certain in judgment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On Cauterizing the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debilitation and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and humidity such that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that on the posterior part of the bladder, where the hair of the small intestine begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the nodules on the pustule; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And be the key-shaped cautery according to what has proceeded.
Capitol .xxxix.	Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Cauterizing the Malar.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come to the malar, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and the menstrual fluxes are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs in the lower abdomen due to their retention, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circle of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the key-shaped cautery be.
Capitol .xl.	Fortieth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On Cauterizing the Dislocation of the Hip.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are abundant in the part of the hip, and the causes of its swelling are made manifest, and the sign is that the limb is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is located in the part which is above.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a circular cautery similar to a circle, as soon as you have sensed with a tent in the circle of the part thus revolved, and so that the part falls in the middle location of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And be the cautery of which the form proceeded in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not before you, then cauterize that with three cauteries and a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the subtlety of all the cord; and then cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Fortieth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On Cauterizing the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the part of the hip, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not concur, and this is old, then it is necessary that you apply to the patient with gross humors by fetid pills or artificial pills or semblances; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: or a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize that on the part of the hip of him with three triangular cauteries in this shape; and make them good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And be the space which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the said, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	But sometimes there are four cauteries, with the one on the middle location on the head of the hip, for that reason.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, that is a circle that contains and burns the subtlety of all the cord.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and does not extend into the joint.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the joint, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the joint on the location where the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery on the pelvis for four times, a little distance from the hairy part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutelliform, and be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the subtlety of the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient says that the pain is extended to the place near the digits of the feet, then cauterize that here where it is felt with a cautery for three points or four or more as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient says that the pain is left below the donut-shaped vein near the joint, then cauterize that with a cutelliform cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cautery that you do not leave the cautery until it has burned nerves or large arteries, and that because of this, it is bad for your patient to suffer or contract.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And behold, I have seen one and another of those who will be cauterized on the pelvis and finally in the cautery, and the inflamed fire burning inside until the tumor reaches its peak, and the pierced and corrupted foot is made.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And thus a great solution of the belly occurs, and thus death ensues.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And thus the wise ones say in the cauterization of the hip, that this is the manner: make it similar to a circle of iron with a circumference equal to half a palm; and be the shape of your orifice according to the thickness of a walnut shell or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle be another third; and be the space which is between them the quantity of the nodules of the pustule; and be those circles about two parts; and be the length of them one nodule or two nodules, and make in those margins of iron decently apparelled in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And be ignited in the fire until it reddens and gives sparks, and be paused above the part of the hip, the patient lying on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that with three circular cauteries in one pass.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that for three days; apply a poultice to it with border and leave the wound open for many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Thus speaks Albucasis: Ah, children, we have used this type of cautery rarely because of the fear of looking at it, and therefore few have found those who look upon it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But from good cauteries, they have suffered at him, and found the place of him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But the cautery with burning medicines is one that you make two circles having a perforated armula in which should be placed the goaf of the iron door; be the length of the partitions in the neatness of their being two nodules or as many as those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each one is the quantity of the thickness of the said; and be above and below, and be that contain themselves between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then pause above the part of the hip the patient lying on his side, and compress your hand over the part of the hip; and then take cold water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be in a small fire little by little, and hold that for the quantity of an hour, and cause the patient to suffer the biting and adaptation of him — as if from fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the cold water from all of the hip with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave that for three days and pause over it with border until the darkness of adaptation is regained, and leave that too for some days, and run from him purulence; this is the last in judgment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the joint or the thigh, make it like a statue in him that contains water according to how it is made in the hip equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of cold water, and you have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of both non-extinguished causes, one for each hip, and crush them and pause in a new wave of which the left part is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the ray.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause the bottom of the wave in another enveloped wave, and pour on that alkali and living causes with warm water which absorbs those for one finger, and then compress them with your thumb for good compression, and leave the hole to descend from it into the parted-off wave in the enveloped wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it on other living causes and another alkali renewed, because that water is now of very strong acidity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines with which the hip is cauterized, such as tea-zit and mulberry juice, and causes with savory in such a way that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts the story of a man from ancient times who was operated on and cured for hip pain and sciatic vein pain, and magnified much about him, saying that no other cure was needed, and that it was healed in one pass, just as he had recommended, because very little effort was required to achieve this.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that you should be taken with certain vertebrae, and if not found, take a fresh fig; and much be crushed with a little grey matter, and paused above the hip where there is pain, or in the joint, or in the thigh, and tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels relaxation of adaptation.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then immerse that in water and therefore when the body of him is relaxed, interpose it in the sun, so that the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use these medicines for cauterization except in the event of evacuation from the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But already Escorides has said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized in a wound of goat, it is cured with ease; and this cautery is done according to this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dried goat's hide and inflame it with fire until it is made of charcoal; and then pause it over the wool and leave it inside until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches into the hip and brings relief to the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this manner of cauterization is called "cauteri de vaquas".
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	At times pain is in both places due to various causes, such as bruising or striking or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infusion of wet and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery is not done except in this one species which is made by effusion of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is good to evacuate the patient with pillules fitidas and similar ones that are made on both places where there is pain, three lines according to the latitude of him, plus one tenths in each line or more, depending on the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of him.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And make a cautery with pointed cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four pointed cauteries in the middle of the joint according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the Cauterization at the Beginning of Giltiness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this illness attacks little children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it happens to their structure in the ear, with a sudden elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you find it in the last cervical vertebra of the spine, and in the nodes of him that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you find this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which takes the cautery on all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with pointed cauteries two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And be the points proper between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure that place until it is healed with this which we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cautery should not be administered in giltiness caused by spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by wet humors that are poured into each member of the body, then when pains come in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout caused by wetness is cured by a method of cure and the pains are not relapsed, then relapse them with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize that with evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot, with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be the olive-shaped cautery, the form of which is this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary that points are made on the fascia of the foot, then make with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the digits or to other joints, and this many times endures, then cauterize that on each digit with three or four cauteries of all parts with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed to produce this effect, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, so as to be only about the thickness of a cord.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the finger and the toe, then administer the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the toes and are called "suagra", then puncture in the circle of the phalanges as they revolve, puncturing those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the said toes, then puncture in the circle of the phalanges on each digit and on the tip of the finger.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise approximately after some days to the joints or muscles, then cauterize all of them on all parts of the aids.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient from good regime and reception of medicines, for if it is made good regime and evacuation is done with this cautery, then the patient will be healed, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the wound occurs in the thighs and says that it is spreading the bladders before the navel to the belly, and this is beginning to approach, then it is good for you to order the patient to leave his diet for a day and to use lenient causes so that the wound may come out of his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your fingers on his back, and command him to keep his arm bent until the orifice is made or the navel or bladders appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the said digits and signal by attempting the rupture on the bone of the pelvis, signaling the extremity of which is similar to the half-circle of the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is hot enough to produce sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the navel or bladder to its natural curvature, and then pause your hand over the location so that the navel does not burst.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already opened between the joints of the patient and left one joint paused, another serving on his thighs, and another on his feet, which has its own fingers.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then pause the cautery over that sign with your hand having the cautery standing upright, and get that into the bone of the pelvis up to the middle of the duodenum; and repeat it in another way if you did not succeed in the first time getting into the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the state of the navel at the time of your cautery, that you do not burn that navel so that it does not bring harm or great evil to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you are using the cautery, do not touch the bone, nor confirm your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is good for children's cauteries to be subtle according to their great and small size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then cure the location of the cautery for three days with borders, so that the scar of fire is renewed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient shall lie on his back for 40 days until the location and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is good that you pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time for his cure, which stretches his belly, and that the navel does not burst forth under the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is time to lift after 40 days, then administer gradually decreasing power, and keep him that way for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should be weakened by labor and replenishment of food and drink, and of loud voices, for when he uses this regimen of healing, then it will be whole.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will say the cure for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and at the beginning, and you want them not to stop, then cauterize the rupture with that round cautery according to the quantity of it, and this is what is exhausted from the cord as well as the third part of it; and then cure that with what we have said, and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already some first ones said that rupture should be cauterized with triangular cautery according to this form, since it is signified by attempt:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is a paused line that goes through the latitude in the latz plus above the rupture, and another line above; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Twist.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is a pain in some members due to bruising or striking and the pain persists for a long time and does not conform to cure with medicines, then it is good that you cauterize with pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And be the cautery of every member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and faultiness, location of twist and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well; and otherwise, then repeat the cautery on him; for of those pains it is customary that they are punctured from one member to another which approaches it, so that you should achieve those with cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers are cured with cautery by a great amount of benefit, and especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and not denied, nor stayed, and fear for the patient that the corruption may comprehend all his body and all his composition, then cauterize that on the head with many cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and a second one further away from it, up to the end of the hair; and both above the two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand with the cautery a little bit to impress on the bone a small impression, and from there are dislocated the scabs, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is alleviated for him; and cauterize on the malleus according to what was previously said.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already spread out on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is good for you to cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two on both kneecaps, and two on both shoulder blades, and two on the vertebrae of the back, and six on the vertebrae of the neck, and two on each ankle, and two on each heel, and two on the tendons of his feet; and cauterize him on all the joints of his fingers and toes, and on every toe and heel, and on the phalanges of his fingers.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are over the tendon that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and conforming it is; and know that the patient has no pain in the cautery, just as they have in their skin, because his body is already stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is good that the cauteries are great or small according to the members and joints, as it is preceded by the species of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with fine flour of ears coitus, mixed with honey and other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some member is stupified or asleep and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that stupified member with cauteries according to the greatness of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And be your cautery entering into the subtlety of the cord a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which occurs in the hands and feet, and on the vertebrae of the back, and then the sensation of the nerves that move that member is restored, and the stupor is renewed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this unless you are wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the Cauterization of Moles that are Morpheas.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When moles are old and do not conform to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize on them with a preconceived cautery a little bit according to the quantity of the subtlety of the cord until the whiteness and color of it are renewed, and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with fine flour of ears and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnagrosa, and the blood of dove or the blood of yronda, each being one part and all being mixed together; and then bind a cloth and place it on the location until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the Cauterization of Crabs.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a crab is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize that with a circular cautery in the circle of it as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to be cauterized in the circle of it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the Cauterization of Adulteries.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adulteries are delayed in maturity, and thus it is because of the superfluity making that one, or because of the state of the patient, which is old in decrepitude, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten in the maturity of adulteries; then cauterize in the circle of it with many small punctured cauteries; and then leave that which will fasten in maturity.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery which has this form; and place that in the middle location of the adulteries until it penetrates the cord.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that location is more distant, because the body of the arm is alleviated; and then cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is corruption that walks in the member, which corrupts it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that corrosion in a location where it tolerates a cautery with fire, then ignite small and great cauteries according to what is convenient in that location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize all of it, from top to bottom, until you eradicate all the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave that for three days, and pause over the locations cauterized with a gentle touch, mixed with oil, until all the scabs are eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then cure that with ointments of flesh-generating things.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted locations.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is cured with some times of acute medicine, because it is a medium in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nonetheless, a cautery with fire is of greater benefit.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure for it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you will need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Claws and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Sometimes there is a malady that appears as a claw, which is a great, inflamed cause that weighs down the foot; and cautery in those places is done according to two manners, either with fire or with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But the cautery with fire is to ignite the cautery, resembling a penitent's vulture, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw from all parts, and is of subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then pause that which is ignited over the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circle of the claw until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And then leave that for three days until the arm begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply an ointment to that with wild marshmallows crushed with salt, and leave the ointment on that for one night, because that will be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the location with an ointment of flesh-generating things until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and many times accidents occur on the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then it is good that you administer with cauteries of water; and this is to take a cannula made of iron or of a penitent's vulture, and place it on the claw; and then pour into the cannula some cold water, and stretch your hand, and you revolve that with compression from top to bottom, and press the margin of the cannula against the root of the claw, and let the cold water flow back to the point of the root; and wait for the patient a little while the mordication of the cold water for an hour, and then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do it to those places and apply the other remedy until you come to all those parts of their own in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those places which are eradicated with the roots of the claws, with that of the ointments which make flesh grow.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the Cauterization of Trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a trembling in some part due to irritation of the nerves or due to fever caused by irritability, or for other similar cause, then it is good that you cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra an individual cautery; and also on the feet of it, and on the stomach of it, with olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And then the trembling subsides and hastens the healthiness of the irritated disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Bleedings in the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are accidental bleedings and pustules that open up into wounds which are made of gross, corrupted matters; then it is good at first sight as appears, to be cauterized all over the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended by fire; or with the roots of long-lived estrogia; or with lentecular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is good to cauterize at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and not to be believed, and thus the superfluity is dispelled from those things, and they are healed.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nonetheless it is good that this should be done with proper evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding from Incision of Archeria.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times there occurs bleeding from archeria which is caused by the wound that needs to be cut away, or by the incision of apostemes or cauteries of the member, and thus it resembles, and it is difficult to cure that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, as it happens to some of these things, then you should take a piece of cloth with your hand and place it on the orifice of the archeria, and pause above that which I have said to strengthen that many times until the flow of blood is stopped by what I have said, and there be no more.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then pause in the fire with olive cauteries, small and great, by number of moles, and blow upon them until they are quite ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those one small or one great according to the location and wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein which hastens more than you will have restored what I have said, and place the cautery until it is abscinded and restrained that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove what I have said and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this again until the blood is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that another evil comes upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain the blood in those places, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: or with a cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities are burnt off and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with a thread or with a ligament by strong constriction, or that certain medicines be applied to it which have the virtue of restraining the blood; and they should be strengthened with poultice and decent compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers decent restraint of it with ligature and constriction by means of cloths or through the position of causes that burn and resemble, does not conform except later.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine, then take a pause from the indicated digit on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand by great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the supreme part of the wound, and above the archery the same thing is not restored; and above the archery be sprinkled with cold water of very great coolness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and also consider in what there is need for a cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second part begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On the Cutting and Piercing and Vents and Bloodletting and Wounds and their Likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about every disease in which cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary in those places with the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters of the subordination of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter by that same manner, so that it may be clarified for whoever desires this, as you have requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, it is good, son, that you learn that in this chapter, it is about the same thing as is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore it is necessary to be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times blood evacuation occurs, which is with blood that contains life; and thus one must be cautious about the sprinkling of the vein or incision on the apostema or appearance of exiture or purgation of the wound or extraction of sagette or incision of peyra and their likenesses.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that over yourselves this should not fall, for sometimes the case requires methods of men with many methods of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are those who rush with their own disease and it is light for them to die, and thus because of the vehemence of what they find in their disease, and because of the length of their disease, and with their disease there is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is one who gives to you his own breath and takes away from you, you hoping for health with him, and his disease is mortal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not good that you consent to that which comes to you from whom this manner is; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not presume any cause about this except proper certain science which verifies what you know, and through which succession praiseable.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your diseases prophetic and indicative science, which is converted to health, for in that is help to you over the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires in you His own understanding and does not withhold from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinct by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauteries, from the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be alleviated for you that which you ask about and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the Cure of Water Contained in the Head of Children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often occurs in children during the time of birth, and when the umbilical cord is tightly tied around the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause that is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have never seen this disease except in children; and all those whom I have seen are on the verge of death, and therefore it is to me a pitiful sight.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was always magnificently expanded to the point where he could not even move on his own due to the greatness of his head, and more so that the humidity increased until it became mortal.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity either accumulates between the vertebrae and the bone, or accumulates behind the bone above the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Therefore the operation in that case is to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure should be about two inches until the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is further increased and the apostema is greater, then there are two incisions according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is behind the bone, then the sign of it is that you should press the commissures of the head on all sides and the water will be squeezed out when you compress that with your hand inwards and not to your surprise.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is good for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then make an incision in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner: and appropriate extract all the humidity from the wound; and then strengthen the incisions with cloths and poultices; and then envelop it with a covering made of vinegar and oil within five days, and then untie the ligature and cure the wound with tentes and unguents, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another manner of incision, which considers how the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water appear, for sometimes it appears more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the accumulation of water is seen, and make it according to what seems best to you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and thus blood flows and the patient dies from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the Incision of the Arteries which are near the Ears, called Hilarseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Three.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When you find some catarrh or rash on the eyes or feet, and it is old, and there is no conformity in that with the cure of medicines, then the last resort in this case is to cut those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to cut those that the patient's head is filled with water, and then apply a rough cloth to the location where the arteries appear, and then strengthen the patient's neck with some cloth; and then consider which vein pulsates; and the locations of each one are on the locations which are near the ears, repressed, and only in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then take note on the artery with a probe, and then cut each one with the spatula of each part, sharp and incisive, entering into the bone, and this is so in the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it where it meets the incisions in the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two inches, so that when some vein is cut, the blood flows out with a pulsating efflux, which springs forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is good that you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three inches, and then take note with a probe, and enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And as for how much blood to let out, it is about one pint. and not too little or too much, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient's disease and of the filling of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone some cause of the skull, then cut away this part in order that the apostema may not become cauterized.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and ligatures of linen cloth, and then cure it with unguents until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter Three.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the Extraction of the Arteries which are in the Temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an ancient or recent emigration occurs in the temples, due to old and humid climates and qualities of the lacertae des temples, or a violent and ancient heat similar to those, and it is medicated with the methods of cure of medicine and this does not conform, then we have resorted to these diseases by extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient feels the pulse which are in the temples; and understand the artery which appears on the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulsation, and is hidden except in a few men by the vehemence of heat.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be strengthened with some cloth; and then apply a rough cloth to the location or evaporate the location with hot water until the artery appears manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the spatula, of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you should scrape the vertebra with that spatula with ease until you reach the artery; and then cut it at the point where it is bent and extract it from the upper parts until you remove it from the vertebra and discover those tunics which are below it, on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it with the tip of the spatula, and then incise one part of it according to the quantity by which the ends of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no bleeding, for if they are not cut off, the blood will not flow at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate about one pint of blood. until three pints.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is great, then it is good that you divide it into two parts with a double ligature of thread or with cords at length, and do not allow it to putrefy before the wound has consolidated and bleeding has ceased.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the superfluity which is between two ligatures; and do this at that hour or shortly after.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that part with a cauterizer into the bone and with a cutlery cauterizer until the ends of it are cut off, and remain in place for that medley of work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of a warm complexion; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is good to apply the extraction of arteries which fills the old wound, and be placed on the powder decently made, and then be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and with some ointment until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another time blood flows from the artery, then immediately stop that bleeding with a ligature, or with a cauterizer, or by filling the wound with a cloth, and strengthen your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if no cause of those is present with you, then pause your hand on the location until the blood has coagulated, and envelop the location with hot water of vehement warmth, so that the sharpness may be stilled, and strengthen as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is easier in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two sheaths, since you have marked the two locations with a probe, and then deposit each one, quietly, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends of it may be lengthened, for they are not fully consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two sheaths are examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But rather if the sharpness is less than two sheaths, it is better, for if they are sharp like two sheaths, close to each other, and do not cut into the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is kept in them and the flesh is cut away slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and more gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space which is between two sheaths is the quantity of thickness of that digit.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the Cure of Eyes with Acute and Acid Tears.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and the body of those veins which are above the forehead is affected outside, and there is no conformity in this with any cause of medicine, and the face of the patient becomes reddened and he feels a wandering movement in his own forehead, as if it were a migration of ants, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, humidified to such an extent that their lids have become constricted, and the eyelids are scorched by the acidity of the tears, the ancient physicians used to mix certain medicines for this cure, and they called that cure "spassa".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to scratch the skin which is on his forehead, and then cut three incisions equally distant from each other according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is about two inches: one incision shall be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the lacertae which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the cutting of the arteries which are in two sides, and lengthen your hand with the continuation of both jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is about three inches adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge appareled or dry cloths, moderately moistened with which you can absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula of two sharp ends, the form of which is as follows:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the temple to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise the entire cord which is between two incisions on the skullbone above the bone, and then make this way from the first incision to the second.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then strengthen the spatula and insert it into the first incision another time with a different instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the edge of that instrument so that it cuts through the flesh and cord, and then insert it into the bone so that it reaches the middle incision, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But then continue the incision up to where the cord appears, and then make it so in the middle incision into the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when a quantity of blood equal to that amount is released, press the places where the coagulated blood has collected.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then pause in each incision, allowing the cut to close like a old wound, and pause over those powders impregnated with vinegar and oil and vinegar, so that no cauterized apostema may appear.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, untie the ligature and administer a great abundance of hot water or tea, and then cure it with an ointment of basilicum and rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the Cure of Tears through Catarrh and descending to the eyes from the partitions behind the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is acute catarrh and continued flowing, and the patient's eyes are exhausted and small, and their gaze is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their skin is raw, and in the forehead of the head there is a sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know through these accidents that the matters and catarrh come from many veins proceeding from behind.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for those is this: that you command the patient to scratch his forehead, and then cut a incision in the middle of the forehead, a little distance apart (and it begins with the incision of the left temple to the right temple; and be an incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the lacertae of the temples which are most suitable for mastigacio), until the bone is revealed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill it between the two lips of the incision with an old wound or with cloths tied.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen above with powders impregnated with vinegar and oil, so that no cauterized apostema may appear.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the apostema has diminished, then it is good to apply heat to the bone until it begins to produce flesh, and then cure it with an exsicative regimen which makes the flesh appear, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophonium, and mix them together, and from that make a poultice and administer it to these wounds for the nativity of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the Cure of that which Catarrhs in the Ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that catarrh in the ears are one of four species, for it is either mineral pyre or a similar cause like iron and vinegar, or it is from plants like cheese or fava, or it is a fluxible cause like hot water and vinegar and their likenesses, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when pyre catarrh in the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not adjust nor believe in the ear, and pause the ear at the sun, and if times the pyre, then it is good to distill some cause of violet oil or size, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the nose run with conditions, and stop up the nostrils by the happening of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then pause in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear to the upper parts, for many times it is forgotten with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gotten, then it is good to administer the extraction of it with the instrument called "epicicario" which has a subtle shape.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten with the instrument, then it is good; and otherwise, it is good to administer the extraction of it with a subtle bone of slight duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not forgotten for this, then it is good to make a needle of iron and insert the tip of the needle into the ear canal and close around the needle with wax and softened oil so that only the needle remains.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with your breath a strong attraction, for many times as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then it is good to take a piece of burnt bark or a prepared wickerwork with which the birds are caught and having taken a small quantity, place it at the end of the ray, and then wrap around it decently placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and then dry out the ear of its humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recounted, then you should stop cutting before it becomes cauterized or spasmed.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of it, and then make it cease between your hands and convert the ear into the upper parts, and finally make a small incision in the root of the ear just above the grey hairs of it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then make the incision of lunar shape until it reaches the pyre, and when the pyre is blackened, stop that if you can with proper instruments; and then close the incision in that hour with speed, and cure it so that it may be healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause that catarrhs in the ear is one of those fats that believe and are inflated, then it is good to administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your attention, then you should take a spatula of fine steel according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the removal of that fat which is catarrhs in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in many pieces, and then extract from those with the onces or subtle gestures, or with incision as we have said, for it is alleviated the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which is entered into the ear, it is good for the patient to use sneezing with conditions at first, and fill his own ear with a little old cloth, and then pour over that ear where there is water, and if by this it is forgotten, it is good; otherwise, you should take many hot irons and lemons according to the length of the digit, and burn those in the fire for a while, and have the patient insert one of those into his own ear canal and beat with another iron on the iron which is behind the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not cease doing this with pyre until all the water is forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And then the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take from paper or cotton gauze. and put one end of it into the ear and stretch the other end with fire until the tip of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put in another gauze and make it so many times until all the water is forgotten, and stretch that with a needle as described above of the extracting pyre.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is small, thus push and pull similar to the sound, cure that as we have said in the division; but if it is from a great body which appears on the side of the vessel, then it is good to administer the extraction of it with gestures and onces, and the cause of it is less severe than all the other causes that catarrhs in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worm generated in the ear, when you cure that with the water that we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confirm your cure, then it is good to look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then you should extract that with gestures or subtle onces; but if no cause appears, then you should take a needle that is straight and wide from which this is the form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle tip into the ear according to the quantity which can be borne by the patient; and then suck it out with a strong suction, and make this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your attention, then you should stop and close the circuit of the needle with wax as we have said; and then administer distillations which have already been tried by the ancients in the cure of worms, and find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of iron, straight, with a small hole, and on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore so it is when you need to extract what is in the cavity of the needle's continuation here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the thread and wrap it around the tip of the needle decently and tightly, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ascending, or juice from some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the needle — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the thread with a knot above and express with your hand that on gentle compression of it so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ascending and the patient feels the oil outside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear is already scorched with fire for a little while.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you will distill into the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure of Ear Plugging.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some times some children or even adults have a blockage in the ear canal due to a wound or flesh that is not perforated; and this blockage sometimes occurs in the inner ear or in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the inner part of it, which does not comprehend the vessel, is in the greatest difficulties for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which you succeed in comprehending the vessel, it is good to pause the ear of the patient in the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if you see obvious opilation, open that with a fine spatula of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the tip of it is in the ear canal where there is a small distance, with one side being sharp and the other not; and the spatula has two lion-shaped sides so that it does not cause irritation to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the blockage is due to flesh born in the ear or in the ear canal, then you should cut it with subtle onces and incise that with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the blockage is in the inner part of the ear, then you should take a subtle thread of lion and heat it with fire for a little while, and then insert that into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you have sensed blockage with that which the patient experiences with ease, due to the weight of having heard, try to relieve the oppression of it with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then pause in the ear with cloth of linen according to the quantity of the width of the canal which you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and make this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some vinegar and soak it in water and powderize over it, and use it; and if the ear is already cauterized, then it is good to remove the vinegar and replace it with another vinegar which you have wrapped in wax that is made with rose oil, until the cauterized apostema yields; and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding, then submerge a sponge or cloth in hot water and pause it over the ear, and use another cure which restricts the flow of blood, as described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the Cure of Athazil which affects the Eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athazils which affect the eyelids of humans sometimes become moist, and at other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore it is good that you take those with needles or onces, and incise them with an instrument from their roots, and then pause over the places as described.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain and bleeding come, then you should cauterize those with a thin lunar cauterizer.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when you insert it into the incisions and many times return, as long as there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure of Grandeyssa which comes to the Eyelids of Humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it grows on the eyelids of humans some cause which is assembled with grandeyssa in its strength and hardness, and therefore grandeyssa is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the operation on them is that you consider whether the grandeyssa is proceeding from there in what appears from the eyelid and is spread to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore proceed with an incision by the distance, and then search out that part from all parts with ease until it evacuates, and then suspend that with a needle and excise it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not skilled in the incision of it and only push to penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision by degrees, then this is not noted in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is great, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is slight, you will not suffer harm from it, because the ointment of it restores that and fleshens.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the grandeyssa is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid, then you should smooth out the surface outwardly; and then elevate the eyelid and suspend the grandeyssa with a needle, unless you need an incision, and press that from all parts; and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this is not noted in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then, with the incision, wash the eyes with salt water; and cure the place with that which fleshens until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the Cure of Axirnah in the Eyelid above the Eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnah is a grayish thing which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mainly affects children, aggravates their eyes, and causes great harm to them; and they cannot gaze at the brightness of the sun because of it, so that tears are shed upon them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you will have them weep constantly on their faces, and sleep on their faces; and thus the eyelids of theirs below are overcast with moistened lids, which already has swelling, and apparent danger is in the eye; and when you press the place with those words, you will cause harm within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one manner of operation is that the patient places their own head on the bed, and then pauses a cloth of linen and of water to make a poultice, and makes from it a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all parts; and then pauses that over that and presses with the words of totality so that harm is aggregated in the middle of the circle; and then proceeds in the middle of that moisture with an instrument inserted into a slit by the distance, and the slit should not be greater than the slit made in flabotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the forefront it is good that you cut the cord entire until you reach arthernach, for in the greatest dispositions, arthernach proceeds by slit according to the form of white greasiness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the words of totality to the outer parts, and revolve between your right and left hand until it is scattered.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert in the slit because you may reach the eye with the instrument and damage that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if there is no arthernach at the beginning of the slit, then adjust the slit a little with ease so that arthernach may proceed; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water, vinegar, and salt, and pause them over the place and strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then some that trickle salt and pause it in the cavity of the slit, because this which remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a cauterized apostema in the place, then cure that with soft poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On Manners of Touching the Eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of humans there are knots, you should adjust those below with natural skin and thus make them old, then those above do not touch the eye and cause habits of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of eyelids and flesh until this becomes a cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye, and cure it in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization; or by making an incision and suture; or through canals as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore it is good that you pause the head of the patient on the bed; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it has turned, well it is; and otherwise, insert a needle into that in which there is a fold of the part more below than the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the fold above, and thus be - near the edge of the eyelid where there are hairs - next to the hairs, and pull the thread up to the parts above with the eyelid, and turn it with the thread.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then proceed in the outer part of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with an instrument inserted into the lacrimal major canal until the lacrimal gland; and then extract the thread and pause below the eyelid with small powders of cotton or cloth, and then sign over the eyelid with a tent, and be like a figure of mirt leaves.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But meanwhile it is good that the figure should be according to the quantity of swelling of the eyelid, for this already varies among men, because some of them need to have a great amount incised from the eyelid in proportion to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then proceed with the instrument over the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major canal into the lacrimal minor canal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your slit is as wide as the natural hairs, like it is the greatest thickness of a king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then put the needle in one of the two angles of the cord, and then excise it entirely, and then adjust with a suture the two lips with a subtle gullet or thread, and cleanse the wound, and make adhere what superfluous threads there are on top of two eyelids with some causes visible; if you want to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then loosen the suture of the threads within three or four days, and then cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without suture and cure it with that which dries and tightens, for the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; but suture is better. Therefore thus I say to those who are old in taxinir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But meanwhile on him there is solicitude for the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in his fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manner in taxinir, and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure like mirt leaves, and then raise the eyelid with three threads separated and gathered according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do so, having the threads, and this is not equivalent, then take a needle with thread and insert that in the middle of the figure, and then proceed with the other thread near the lacrimal major, and the second thread near the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the words of totality the threads with equality, and then lift your hand with equal lifting, lift the entire cord above which is marked as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if there is an apostema caused by your incision or slit, settle that apostema with cerote and lukewarm water, and with ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some times it grows on the eyelid where their own hairs are converted, then it is good that you use in that of what we have said about incision; but suture in each case is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Taxinir by canals is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you convert the eyelid and cut the figure which is below according to what I have recounted; and then by art make two canals or two thin staves from which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their width is less than the width of the instrument.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each partition, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And then gather each one with subtlety over what superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the canals of each partition with a strong constriction, and leave it for some days, because the cord will die and be rejected and will settle in until it falls into place.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then tear the cord apart with forceps, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the Elevation of Stinging Hairs in the Eye with a Needle when the Hair is Hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard, and sharp, and sting the eyes, the operation in that is that you take a subtle needle and insert it into that thread of cedar and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and note each one in a manner very subtle.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And be the length of the threads of the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another subtle thread below it in brief, and tie the extremities of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on the bed, and be near the sun so that your work may be declared, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair adjusted to which it has been necessary to apply art, and make that penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you extract that above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull out the hair above and insert it into its place, and be the hairs one, two, or three, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull out your hand with that until the hair is extricated and settled into its place in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is attracted to the eyelid and not extracted the hair, you will attract the eyelid to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until in it is extracted from the upper part of the brow.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And behold that with the vision of the eye, for then you will extract the eyelid and the thread, and gently pluck out each and every one of them from the eye, and leave the closures for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you will adjust one long hair from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or so that it leaves space until it becomes long again, and then you will elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the Cure for Cataract Which Appears in the Eyelid Above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When cataract appears in the eye, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is constricted above or on one side or the other, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this cataract either is natural or accidental, and it is caused by consolidation of wound or sections or cauterizations, or by likenesses to their maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation in that is that you will cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and insert a piece of linen cloth between them, and tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not good that you use any cure of it from the causes which dry up and constrict; for if you do so, it will return to be worse than ever before, without any hope.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which soften like fenugreek, and steep it in hot water where coriander is grown and sown with linseed, or a poultice of aquilon, which is liquefied with some oil, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate it with all art, and not be consolidated according to the form in which it began.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said, is nothing but some correction of cataract that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the Cure for Cataract Which is Done in the Eyelid Below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This cataract which is made in the eyelid below, which is truly called vertadierament cataract; and it is of some natural origin, or other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is made by wound or section or cauterization or by other likenesses.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation for that is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and cut it with the needle, and insert it into an instrument of broad width.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should, good is; and otherwise, take the thread and place that in the cleft figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close the two slits on the side of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And be the extremities of the two slits at two angles of the incision, which you have made until they converge, and be of their own made angle, so that when they come together, a figure is formed from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda (λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh so that it covers the quantity that is the edge of the eyelid below, which is the shape of the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with the thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said about soothing medicines and poultices, until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the cataract develops through a fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is good that you make an incision with a flat opening on the hairs of the eyelid as it has preceded.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with a poultice between two lips, according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the cure for cataract when it is above or below, that runs in its operation, according to what is prepared in the form of cataract, and that is in a form of diverse variations.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsmen always prepare art in any way possible for each operation to bring back the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to what is convenient for him with regard to the operation and instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or to the Cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in many men, it is necessary to solidify the eyelid above the white of the eye, and to prohibit its natural movements and works, therefore it is good that you insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and lift it up or stretch it with the uncles.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you will insert the adhesion with a subtle instrument, which is not sharp as cuts, having obtuse a little so that the patient may not be disturbed during the operation, and leave the instrument so that it does not touch the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And be your incision such that it excises that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid may return to its natural form and all the adhesion may be healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put into the eye salty water with which you wash it, or distill in it a solution dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of linen, and place it over the eye infused in white of egg, and then use for three days causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the Incision of the Eyelash and the Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimal Glands.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelash is according to two manners, because either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard, subtle cypress; or it is non-nervous, similar to white condensed humidity, which when it comes into contact with iron, takes on a dryness, and the eyelash is cut off and the needle is not fixed in place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the lacrimal gland, which gradually grows smaller as it covers the vision and prohibits the light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the manner of working in this incision is that the patient places his head on the bed, and then opens his eyes, lifts the eyelid with your hand, and carefully collects the eyelash with a needle of gentle doubling and stretches it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a piece of horse or ox or cow hair, or something similar, or a strong thread, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the eyelash, and penetrate that with the needle, and tie the eyelash to the thread; and stretch that to the upper parts, and excise on the side of the eyelash which touches the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you will follow it with the hair until the end of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you will insert the remaining part into the root of the lacrimal gland with a subtle instrument or small scissors, and loosen the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland so that through this incision there may not be continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the eyelash with its extended or tied needle is thus, as we have said, and then it should be excised with a lion-shaped instrument, which has this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that in the instrument you do not touch the tunic of the cornea and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision should be left in the eye for a few days or until a white crust forms, and let that remain until the next day; and then cure it with water as is necessary, until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the eyelash is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that place with the thread, then many times this species of eyelash is cured by medicines, and is healed just like yeast and recounted in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to excise it, then you will operate on the eye of the patient and take a subtle instrument, lion-shaped, with acute precision, according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rarefied and is confused and enters into the root, then you will distill from your eye a white crust or a grayish-gray crust or a crushed salt, and stop up the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on that until everything is removed from it, unless a contrary aposteme catches in the eye, because then you will leave it alone, and cure the aposteme at first until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that with reason, until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye for great harm, should be suspended by thread; and excise that part from it, and do not finish the incision so that you may not cut off flows of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill into the lacrimal grayish-gray crust or white crust, until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the Incision of Algae and Water that is Born from Flesh Adjusted in the Eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in some eyes is born red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the parts above and is assembled like the rose of a balcony.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation in this case is that the patient places his head on the bed; and then opens the eyes of that place and collects all that flesh with suitable needles and threads; and then excises the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, and beware of the eye that you do not touch it with your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your incision with which you excise those or with the instrument which we have recounted in the incision of the eyelash, or with small scissors with which it is gathered in such a way that the form of it comes to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt, or distill into it red powder resembling it to the corrosive medicines, and place on the eye outside a cloth soaked in white of egg until you are assured that there will be no aposteme.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains any cause of algae and it is covered with a scar, and you fear an aposteme, then leave the eye alone and cure that aposteme with water which will heal that aposteme, and then repeat the operation on that until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which occurs in the eye of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But still you must be careful to alienate all cure of the eye by natural or accidental means, working with iron, and not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that member is sufficient for that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the Collection of Sabellum in the Eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sabellum is a red vein which runs through the eye and prohibits its normal operation, and by its length it reveals the eye's days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which there is sabellum is strong and does not have another disease besides sabellum, then you will collect that sabellum.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place his head on the bed, and then suspend those veins with one thread or two according to your prudence; and let that thread be of subtle doubling according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two threads gradually in one case, according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then are collected those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wash away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins to be removed from the eye and turned around.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not touch the eye with the extremities of the instrument; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very firm in your operation that you only excise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then you will distill into the eye green or red powder so that with its acute corrosion it may dissolve the water that is removed from the sabellum.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect all in that hour, then gather as much as you can and plaster the whole with water that relieves the pain of it, and leave it for a few days until the pain is assuaged and there is assurance of no aposteme.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on that according to the same manner until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the Reduction of Swellings at the Nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure swellings with cauterization or sharp medicine, and they do not heal as told, then there is no need for further intervention in that place, but rather you should cut into the aposteme until its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is in it and drain it so that the bone may be revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackness appears in it, then you will rasp it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called "aspre cap", and it is made of iron, and its head is rounded like that which is made pointed by a file or an emery wheel in a subtle point (such as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that on the corroded part of the bone, and then turn it between those two fingers, and press your hand gently, little by little, until you know that that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And so it will be done some times, and then restore the place with causes of drying and tightening.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the sickness has been removed and remains for 40 days, and is not renewed or apostemated, nor does any accident occur there, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in that place to intervene, but rather to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you take a thread according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the shaft of it be first thinned out to the extremity in such a way that it is as if it were worn away.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that on the bone, and it should be right next to the lacrimal; and stretch your hand a little bit from the eye, and then turn your hand with the thread in such a way that it penetrates all the bone, and he feels the patient by pushing with his hand as if he were looking out through that when he takes his hand away.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, then restore the place with drying and tightening medicines in such a way that they will be suitable for your patient.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the material which was flowing to the parts above returns to the nose, therefore that is easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes entirely and does not cause harm or diminution in the vicinity, then you must loosen the patient, and then follow, and then pause for breaths in the neck without scarification and with good suction; and then place a poultice on the eye made of equal parts of safflower, aloe, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster over the eye with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's mane many times, and each cloth be folded in four pieces; and make powder from those.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with a strong, tight cloth; and repeat the suction without scarification; and then stop the suction and leave the eye straight for a day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament is relaxed, then it is necessary to be very strict.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then stop the ligament for a day and night just as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the eye has already been reduced, then it is good; and if not, then you must repeat the plaster with powders, tightness, and suction until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the uveal tunic becomes disrupted and there is an eminence that proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and it is rounded in shape like a human being by this, and you want to excise it, then the operation on it is as we have recounted, where you introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the lower part and another needle into the double thread from the lacrimal side, and make that thread penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then excise the location of the double thread and lift up with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that motion.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place on the eye wool infused in white of egg, and leave it until the thread comes out with the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the eye with water that comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather all parts together with a circle of cloth into the eye, and then it is pierced with a subtle instrument that comes to the forepart of the eye, and flows the humor of the cornea, and descends the eye and enters soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the Cure of Alconati.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called Alconati is nothing but a humor that is settled in the eye, similar to water descending and not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of operating on it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight bed, and then take his head in your hands on both sides, and lift him up until you see the humor coming out from the parts above, and then dry it and not let it flow down, and stop the light, and the patient sees the causes just as he sees.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow down below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of the humor is not prepared with the water as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a subtle instrument and find it on the panniculus cerning a little of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic of the cornea in the crown (into that place where you see), until the humor is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is forgotten, then you will distill into the eye cold water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then be cured by the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXIII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the Cure of the Water Descending from the Eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable to pierce with the instrument declaring the word, then that one according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and bind his head with a cloth, tight and strong.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the patient's eye on which is the water, if it is the left eye; or with your right hand, if it is the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take almonds, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the extremity of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the rim in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and then press the almond with virtue and turn your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached the seen cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the almond to the fore part be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the tunic of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almond in the location where is the water, and then attract it down once or twice, and therefore if the water descends soon, then see the patient on which his vision will be restored soon, and the almond in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you will remove that other almond before it is thrown away.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And therefore when it is dry and does not descend, then you will extract the almond with ease, and turn your hand with it little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear gemstone salt in that water and wash the eye inward; and then pause outside the eye with a cloth or stopper or wool infused in rose oil and egg white, and bind the eye with water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we will use those of our time that are passed on to us with an album of egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey your almond at the instrument of the eye because of its hardness - for there are some men whose eyes are very hard - then you must take the instrument which is called "alberid" and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce with that instrument the conjunctiva, and do not keep your hand in the wound, but rather make a way for the almond to reach a subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the almond as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And the completion of your work, prepare the patient for a sleeping descent made in the dark house where he will sleep on his back with no movements whatsoever.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of it so that his nature is aligned, and not move his head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligature be according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then loosen that in the dark house and uncover the fresh sight, and make it see some causes, and then return to the ligature within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not need to do that at the hour of medications or soon after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They had told you to abandon this because the water flows more lightly through great and fervent contemplation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an aposteme appears cautiously, then you must remove the eye before the seventh day and correct it with water that dissolves the aposteme.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you absolve the sight of him and pause on his face near the orifice by which it is governed for some days, existing in the darkest darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then be guided gradually from that darkness and converse with his own causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy there is no excuse for the disciple to see some things at times, and then you will be bold on the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And already it has been passed on to us by some of those who are at the Artach, and some said that it makes fire in the Ayrrac, greatly perforated, through which the water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But meanwhile, I have not seen this done in our land which has perfected that, nor read it in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magnesia, by which one is above those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or bronze properly, and they are the extremities of their own magnesia with this subtlety triangularly, the sharp end thus as it is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the Cure of Cured Meat in the Nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born various meats diversified of which some cause is assembled to that of Scorpio's weight or to Polyp's flesh; and this disease is called Polypus because it resembles that flesh represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there is a cancerous meat, pale and of a dark color; and then it is that the lion's flesh is not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent nor cancerous, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands and place him in the sun, and anoint his nose with that meat.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the parts above, and then incise it with the sharp instrument of one side into the part where you know that all the meat has been removed; if there remains any cause from which ablation is possible, then you must ratify that with one of the subtle instruments with ease until no cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if the patient's wound is septic or an apostema appears cautiously, then you must pause and apply that which is necessary; or if it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cauterize and cut out that part until the wound is abscessed and all cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then be guided in the nose, approaching the incision with water or oil.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is swollen and there is moisture proceeding from it into the palate, then you will know that it has already been cured.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that there is no meat in the nose above the bones of the nostrils to which the ablation has not been performed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, it is necessary that you insert the faithful one into the place where there is some thickening, and nuzzle in each notch the quantity of said or minus, and pause between each notch the quantity of said or minus, and guide the patient and insert one end of the faithful one into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is possible to it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, that the patient's odorant is attracted into the canals of the nose, and be extracted on his gullet, because many times the same thing seems to happen at school, and it is a light cause for one who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the faithful one, with one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then administer a seal of meat to the notches that are on the faithful one, and do this until you know that the flesh is already at the notches of the faithful one.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the faithful one, and pause in the nose near the abstraction of blood, one cup, and do this for three days or more until the encrustation is all consumed that remains from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then pause in the nose with a lead cannula for several days until it is cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you find a cure that exists, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making capipurge, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or bronze, which is like a small lantern open, just as a small shell, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument for making capipurge, and it shall be flat, open; at which will be a handle on the last part of it, with which you can hold that when you are extracting in oil or water that you want from the juices and causes susceptible.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the prices of capipurge: recipe of enforbi of castor, of white balayra, of gengibre, and saffron piletre, of long pepper, of escarole, of epetum spice an ounce. And thus you will make pills with the juice of bleda and caulis, and make them into pellets, and one pellet will be tempered with tea water, and inserted into the nostrils of the patient sitting upright.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the Worms that are in the Extremities of the Nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it is born a worm in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and increased in some days until the regard of it is seen.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore it is necessary that you incise it at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause over the place, or cauterize or apply medicine that is suitable for the location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if it is delayed in its incision until it is magnified, then consider whether it is softened, hard, of dark color and little sensation; then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times those who incise this apostema incur great malice towards that which had been.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apostema is of lion's touch and not of dark color, and many times incision is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the place with what exists and constrains until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the Suture of the Nose and Lips and Ear when Continuity is Dissolved by Wound or Similarity.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer in this operation except in certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you find that some cause of those is present, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you should adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and carefully cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then it is necessary that you excise each part of its own cord-like appearance until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and over those sprinkle blood of dragon and powdered three times, and pause on the powder a compress of emplastrum diaphanic, or some other consolidating emplastre, and leave that bound for two days or three, and then remove that and replace it with another emplastre and leave that until the flesh is fully absorbed, and carefully cure with anointing until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with faithful thread as to your own and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the Extraction of those Causes that come in the Two Lips in the Parts Behind.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times it happens to many men in the parts behind their lips certain hard and grainless apostemas, some smaller and some larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lips and fissures into each of those hardnesses from all parts, and then fill the location with sagittated lint until the blood is restricted, and then be washed with hot water and be cured the location with what exists as a styptic, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the Incision of Adjusted Meat in the Gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great many times there is a growth of flesh above the gum adjusted meat which the ancients called albulus, therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with one or two threads, or that you hold that with forceps and incise that as it should be, and let the blood run or flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then pause on the location with sagittated lint or other powders that are styptic or exciting.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, because the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth of the parts behind and those of the front and between the gums are adjusted rough, sharp, and some blackened, and some turned yellow or green until the gum is corrupted and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and pause the top of him in your seat, and ratify the teeth in which those roughs and causes appear like sand until there remains no cause, and thus make the blackness and yellowness and other things disappear.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this is the beginning of the reason, good it is; and otherwise, then you must iterate the reason over those on another day and on the second and third until it comes to the final statement in what you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have required many remedies of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the razors with which the tooth is razed from the part behind are another of the razors with which it is rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors should be prepared by you as you will see soon.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Eradication of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and toil in its entire eradication from it, for there is no cause that can surpass its growth when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance into which it excites itself in its eradication from it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But it is necessary when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, that you firmly certify what is the aching tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and assumes it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and then pause until the sick and aching tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, as you must be certified which is the aching tooth, and knowing well, it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of all parts, and then pause and let it settle with your own hands or with subtle forceps little by little until it conceives.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then pause in the strong hold with great force for good speaking or sudden power, and pause the head of the patient between your fingers that you will hold well so as not to harm, and then pull out the tooth according to rectitude in manner that you do not break it, nor give more major pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if not forgotten, take one of those instruments, and put that at the disposal of all parts with facility and effort the removal of it thus as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is cracked or corroded, then it is necessary that you cover with cloth that crack and strengthen it with a thin thread at the extremity of a subtle ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction upon it as you take hold.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work with exquisite care through scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard well your strength so as not to break it and remain divided from it, and return upon the patient for the malice that will be greater than the first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their fistulation and audacity towards the eradication of their own, without administering what we have recounted; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to be broken, and all or part of those teeth become disordered, or that tooth is extracted with some bones of the mandible as many times have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the eradication of it should be washed away with hot water or warm water and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if it is necessary to flow with blood in this way, just like many times it has been necessary, then take some quantity of egg white and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that egg white does not concur, then cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and subtle tongs with which the tooth is manipulated at the beginning should be of long extramital, short handle, and thick, so that they are not doubled when you must work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And should be thus as times of thick handle, so that when you strain with them they are not doubled, but short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And should be made of Indian iron, with curved extremities, and in the extremities of those, should be teeth which some enter into others and strain through constriction descending strongly, and sometimes those extremities are in the shape of a bird's beak, which is called ciconia, so it is guarded, and they have strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Eradication of Teeth and Extraction of Bones from Mandibles Broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must eradicate a tooth that is broken for some reason, it is necessary that you pause over the location with a border for one day or two until the location is softened; and then insert gently or tongs the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guard, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of theirs are made behind like lime or alfalfa.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your will with these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary that you hollow out the root and disarticulate all the flesh and insert the instrument which has no name, that is a small lever of which the shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should be of short extremity, thick and small, and not be worn out for that reason that it will not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is forgotten, good it is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular extremity in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and with a more subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already you help yourself with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form, approximately following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the rasping of teeth; for soon it is made with this instrument which is assembled to great once, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extremity bent or short, which should have some thickness, and not be worn out for that reason that it will not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And therefore you know that the instruments of teeth are many and similar to each other, as well as the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the artisans skilled and subtle in their art, find for themselves by their own means, according to what it signifies the operation and various diseases; for they are of the diseases to which the ancients did not decree nor pause proper instruments, due to the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or of the other bones of the mouth is broken, or if it pines away, then be sure to place great care upon that in its location where it is suitable for the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be in a place with some thickness, little by little, and be strung or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and then restore the location with medicines suitable to this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small putridity in the bone, then pull out that from that putridity and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the Cure of Teeth Elevated above Others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are elevated above their natural form and majorly so in women and especially venerable maidens; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not very close to another tooth, and there is no possibility of suture or binding of it, then pull out that one; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you must incise that one with this instrument whose form is like this; it resembles a pig's tooth, and is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp extremity.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And then your incision should be with which you will incise that one in many days for the hardness of the tooth, and so that it is not confounded with other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if an elevated tooth is exposed to erosion, then remove that one with a file of Indian iron whose form is like this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be all of Indian iron and the edge slightly curved; and it should have many small points like a file with which are made needles, with which the tooth is filed gradually over several days with ease, so that there is no other tooth confounded and decayed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line it up in the end, and pull out that one with some rasors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is broken and the tongue lies against it, then it is necessary that you file it down until the sharpness of that fragment is removed and rounded off, and be filled in such a way that the tongue does not lie against it nor corrupt the word.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot strengthen over that which is damaged, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then for this reason, so that they do not decay, it is necessary to reinforce those with gold wire and not silver, because silver turns green and soon perishes within a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the wire should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the form of the recipe is that you take the wire and double it within two healthy teeth, and then you increase by two bends of the wire between two damaged ones, or one or many, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the thread within the part from which you began, and strengthen your work with ease and wisdom until it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And then tighten the thread with which you will bind the wire to the roots of the teeth that do not decay.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then incise the excessive extremities of the wire with forceps or tongs, and add those in each place with gestures, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let go of it just as straight as possible.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is broken or separated, strengthen that one or those with another wire in such a way for all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just like these linked together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one tooth or two returns to its place, and each remains in its own location, and are re-grown just as we have recounted, and remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only skilled artisans and wise men can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable for some reason of cow bones, and is made from them in the shape of a tooth, and is placed in a location where the tooth has fallen out, and is strengthened just as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the Incision of the Ligament which is in the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is found behind the tongue sometimes or is natural to it, or accidental and occurs through a wound that has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in this case is that you open the mouth of the patient, and the existing head of his tongue comes into view; and then elevate his tongue, and carefully incise that ligament according to its latitude, until the tongue is freed from its retraction.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if in that case there is some hardness or stiffness, and this is due to the consolidation of the wound, then you should take care not to incise too deeply, but rather cut along the latitude until you have severed the ligament and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not a gaping wound in the flesh before the ligament, and that you do not cut too deeply and cause blood to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then be sure to wash away the remains of the incision with warm water or vinegar, or with a cloth soaked in water; and then pause beside the tongue and let it lie down; thus is the method which will keep the patient's tongue from becoming stiff again every night so that another knot does not form.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is a flow of blood, pause over the location with a poultice; but if the bleeding ceases, then let the wound be cauterized with a caustic lanolin which is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that cure to other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of a Ranula behind the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, behind the tongue, an abscess forms similar to a small boil that prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and very soon it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case is that you open the patient's mouth, seated before the sun, and consider the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dull red or black color, hard and dry, which the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is turning white and has moisture, then you should insert a probe into it, and incise that part with a subtle spatula, and cut off the entire portion; and if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then you should pause above a poultice, so it is vetriol, until the bleeding ceases.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have completed it in accordance with the location, so that it is washed with warm water and salt; and cure that part with the other cure, just as it was done before, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the Extraction of an Abscess from Both Ears and that which is nothing in the Gullet and other Abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it occurs in the Gullet, so are the glands which are assembled together, which bulge out and are named two Ears, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you should consider if the abscess is hard, of dull red color, and with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; rather leave it until it has matured, and either you will remove it or it will break apart on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, rough, and the root of it is subtle, then that one needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in this case is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already subsided and repaid its debt or if it has diminished by some diminution; and then make the patient sit before the sun, and his head should be in its proper place, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes hold between his own most prominent teeth the tongue of him behind with an instrument very noble, whose form is this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be subtle like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then, as you take hold of that tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and you look at it with the skin around it, then take a probe and put that in the mouth, and pull that out as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or other causes of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument whose form is this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is assembled to forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the end of the other, very sharp, made of Indian iron well ingrained.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with a spatula whose form is this: And it should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And once you have incised one notch, incise the other following this same manner of incision, and then apply the incision to the patient's mouth with a cloth soaked in water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if bleeding occurs, apply water from the decoction of scorsa of milgrana or of mirtra leaves and similar to that of caustic substances until the bleeding is stopped, and then cure it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there are other abscesses in the gullet besides those two ears, and you should incise them according to what I have said about incising two notches together.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you had already treated a woman who had an abscess in her throat which was turning yellowish, with little sensation, and which had already closed up her throat, so that she was breathing very tight, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water for a day or two, and it seemed to be on the verge of death if you hadn't acted within a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so large that it had taken two ribs between which it had pierced through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you carefully inserted your finger and stayed in one of them, and pulled it out, and pulled out a large portion of it, and then you incised the other notch of the other hole, and then you opened the patient's mouth, and compressed their tongue, and then you placed the probe in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you cut out a large part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And thus the throat of that woman was completely cleared, and she began to drink water and eat food, and then you did not cease to incise that abscess many times over a long period, and subsequent abscesses occurred in its place, which you incised until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And thus you went away and cauterized the throat of her, and afterwards there was no addition; and then you walked around and did not know what God had done to that patient through you.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the Incision of a Hernia when it is Abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the hernia descends to the scrotum and is abscessed and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the left side large and rounded, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not concur, and it only happens that the abscess is left behind and is subtle, then you must incise that which is added roundly; and if it is to that length, and is bleeding, of a dull red or black color, and there is no sensation to him, then you must beware the incision of him, for in that case there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you incise it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then you should make the patient sit and take hold of his tongue with an instrument whose form is this: And place the probe in the new abscess, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two notches.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware that you do not incise it except at the point where it is adjusted to its natural term without addition, for if you incise too much, you will deprive him of his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then use what we have recommended in the incision of two notches, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is terrified by the incision, beware that you use it in the cauterization of him without fear, and the manner of cauterizing in him is not but with sharp water, and you pause the patient's head in its proper place, and then take hold of his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and take some of the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to that living cause, and pause it neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	So the extremity of it is in a concavity in which the medicine is paused just like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the abscess, and the patient will lie on his side so that his saliva or mucus from his mouth flows into the internal cavity of the abscess through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend to any cause over his throat and trouble him.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take your hand and the medicine, and express it on the uvula for a space of about half an hour until you see that it is blackened and calmed by the biting action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a cannula above until the cloth adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then cauterize it in the circuit of the uvula with a cloth wrapped around it in a border, and clarify it with that which is in the circuit of the medicine, and be washed with warm water, and be treated externally with an embrocation, and internally with poultices until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more saved than incision and more free from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with this method which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured through sublimation in this manner: take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabic gum, chamomile, and similar herbs to those of the plants, and mix all these causes, or some of them, into a pot, and be submerged in warm water, and boil; and then stir the pot decently, and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which is placed an iron instrument shaped like this: made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula above the tonsils, so that the uvula is very much obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this many times until it is dry, and take care not to do this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because too much would be absorbed into the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather declare the abscess to be so.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then take a reed and make a plug of wood in the extremity of it, so that the mouth of the patient may be stopped up, because the wooden plug prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the Extraction of Thorns and what adheres to the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times something sticks in the throat or thorn of a fish or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then it is necessary that you extract what appears to be from those things, above which the sight sees, since you take hold of the tongue with an instrument in the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden from you in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach, because very often the cause attached to the throat will be forgotten through vomiting; or that the patient drinks a glass of vinegar or essence of lettuce or a bottle of dry bread; or takes a piece of sea sponge, and binds it strongly with a thread, and then the patient swallows it, so that when it reaches the place where thorns are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And instead take an eel and bind it with a thread, and let it be placed inside and then extracted; or take a tube and insert it and then pull it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if those causes which we have said are not forgotten, then take a leaden instrument shaped like this:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be more thick than a ray a little bit, and in the extremity of it there should be a concavity which you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And it should raise its head upwards and take care that the touch of its bone in the throat, so that it may enter into the body and with that which will compress the bone or the thorn, or that it will put itself under its own hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But meanwhile the patient should insert it with ease, by his knowledge of the place where the attached cause is and compresses below, and pulls out his hand with the instrument upwards, all according to the quantity prepared to be forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Extraction of Blood-Clots Attached to the Throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When it is medicated with blood-clots with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not concur, consider then that in the throat of the patient there is sunlight, because you have compressed his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you find the blood-clot, extract it with a small probe or subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and then pause in the concavity of the cannula a hot iron, and do this many times (until the blood-clot is dead and falls out of the throat) and abstain from giving water to the patient all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full vial of warm water, and open the mouth of the patient with it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any cause pass through it and spoil the water for an hour afterwards by his own hand, because the blood-clot soon as it feels the water takes fright.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not forgotten as we have recommended, then sublimate the patient with cinnamon or asafoetida using the instrument which we have recommended in the sublimation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	And do this, so that it will fall.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way of operation in the sublimation of it, that you take a pot in which are burning coals and the pot is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and the extremity of the instrument is placed in that hole; and then bring down the sublimation; and pause the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the sublimation is not forgotten until you know that the sublimation has reached the blood-clot, for the blood-clot will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't work, then you repeat the sublimation many times, and abstain from giving water to the patient, and give him salty and bitter causes, and not fresh water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which blood-clots are extracted from the throat when seen; and it resembles forceps thus, except that there is some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The one that is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is grasping, with a lime that is sharpened, so that when you compress some cause, it will not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon in warning against abscesses and their treatment.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are many species, of many methods, according to the remembrance of their kind, each one described in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And thus diverse in perforation and section of them through two methods, one of which is by the species of abscesses themselves; and therefore, according to the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is according to the places in which they occur in the body, for the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess that occurs in a bony place is different from the abscess that occurs at a joint; and each one has its own judgment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some abscesses are such that they should not be punctured, but rather allowed to mature with the pus in those places or completed as they are.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses are such that they should be pierced when they are crossed, and not allowed to mature according to their completion, just like those abscesses that are proper to joints. When an abscess occurs near a joint, it prolongs itself within the circuit of the joint, and very often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or is an abscess near a main limb, and if you delay piercing it until it has matured too late for the main limb; or is an abscess in the buttocks, then pierce it unripe; and do not make it cross, but rather the one that is proper to the buttocks, so that the prepuce of it is not putrefied and elongated outside the buttocks, and a fistula is formed, or it becomes inflamed in its term and does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But it is necessary that you know the hour of piercing the abscess, and thus it is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and fever, and a decrease in the swelling and pulse, and a sharpness at the top of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And where it is necessary to know that the piercing should be done in the place most distant from the abscess and coming from the cure of the elevation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And piercing should be done through the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in places of the lacertae, tendons, nerves, and arteries; and, finally, in all places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a bony place, then it is better that you delay piercing it until you are confirmed of its digestion according to completion, as we have said; for if you pierce it too early, it will prolong the body's putrefaction and many foul humors, and very often the lips of it will be hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be pierced according to the latitude of the flesh or body if it is necessary, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary that you administer a small piercing, and in large abscesses a great piercing and a wide or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are the abscesses in which it is necessary that the cord is concaved and is incised, when it becomes thus as if pan and made are in term, as with those that occur in many parts of the duodenum and of boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those it is in which it is incised as if it were a figure of a myrtle leaf, as with the abscesses of the groin.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are incised with a round section and a lunar section, and resemble those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that one to which there is no such abscess as those of the lions, superficially, it is necessary that you pierce it with a superficial or flat piercing only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is necessary that when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you pierce it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that moment; having extracted one part of it, and then plug the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and then repeat this many times according to gradation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a woman in childbed, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the exit of the pus, and very often the patient dies, and you open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	So guard this chapter with great caution, and accordingly administer your piercing in which you pierce these abscesses, so that you wash away the plagues and consider whether the plague of the abscess is small, or is a flat section; then you should administer those things of old or new patch; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is necessary that you pause in each hole until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess is separated a part of the cord or has concavated that in the circuit, then it is necessary that you complete it with an old patch or with a thread made from linen cloth, as when you treat bread or raisins, without moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and accordingly process it and cure it with water as needed for the dressings until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during the hour of your operation, then you should administer warm water and vinegar to the mules where a linen cloth is wrapped, and pause that over the location of the blood flow many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer a remedy and cure, and powder those which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary that you apply poultices in wine and oil, and pause those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is necessary that you apply poultices wrapped in water and oil or wine and oil, and let it be warm for three days, as we have said, and then remove the abscess and wash it with water as needed until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction that I have said of all abscesses in which way is the path of its cure by chapters individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cord of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cord of the head, small abscesses, and some species of nodes that contain tunics which are their own facts; and the species of them are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are pustules, and those that contain humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those that contain humidity similar to powder, and resembling their own kind; and those that are lapideous, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you should not cause tension in the arteries.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in this section is that you apply them with an instrument of the form which resembles it, which is called "entromes", until you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if what it contains is humidity, then you should divide it with a section according to its length, in a superficial section, following this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begins in the section of the line of .B. up to the line of .G. Then, as the humidity is evacuated, you should excoriate that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause from it, for many times it returns if some cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And accordingly submerge a patch in Egyptian ointment, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that the wound and leave it until the next day, for by this means you corrode all that remains of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly iterate over that patch with Egyptian ointment secondarily and tertiary times, if it is needed, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and cut once between two lips of the section, and scrape off all that part, and exert your skill in extracting the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if it causes tension in your arteries, then do as I have recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do with the abscess that is hardened by section and cure according to what I have said; and section on a hardened abscess is easier, for it has little blood and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times there are such cases of these abscesses that are in the head of certain men, with whom there is no humidity; and this cause is because you incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman who was so deaf, harsh, white, and numb, that it could not be touched, and if someone had touched it with that percussion, it would have hurt him.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not the same chapter, such as those that come to the heads of children and are filled with wax, but the section of these all is superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the piercing of those at the lower part of them, so that the body of the pus may be relieved in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And accordingly cure those with what is needed for their cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits and groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic proper, and as with the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some are lapideous, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not submit to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find to have good disposition in the Touchment, of which the color is manifestly related to the color of the cord, and is bad at all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not swollen, it is necessary that you incise it with a superficial section from above to below along the line of .G. up to the line of .B., and scrape off all that part, and extend two lips of the cord with one cut, or with many cuts if you need them, just as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is even more caution that the vein or nerve should not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is more caution that the spatula not be very sharp, so that it does not adjust to your hand and incise, or that you disturb the patient, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you incise a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then pause in the wound until it becomes dry and rough, or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the wound, and leave it until the acuteness of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes softened and begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And accordingly, inquire about the sign your teacher has indicated if there remains any cause of other small scrofulas, then incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of a large scrofula, then it is necessary that you do not incise that scrofula from its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	And accordingly, tie up that with a double thread and let it rest until it falls by itself without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And accordingly, fill the wound with an old patch which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and accordingly cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them together as soon as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you find that there is remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you understand how to incise its root, and extract it and administer suturing and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofulas which contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial incision at the place where it appears to you as the location of maturity, and pause the incision so that it reaches the pus base of the body, just as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And accordingly, administer the incision with ointment and similar substances to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, when you see the wound already cleansed, then cure it with ointment of generating flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section on the pilling of the abscess which occurs in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They called this section in the old days "epilhot", and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have syphilis, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, because through this there would be no help, for all the veins and major vessels of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses that are cauterized in the mouth or groin or both ears, when the disease is not in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of epilhot to avoid the destruction which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, it is necessary that we incise the epilhot below three circles of the epilhot, or four with a small section in latitude between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in cartilage, not in bone, and this location is suitable for section, because it is privy of flesh and the vessels of blood from there are distant.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, it is necessary that he extends the cord of the groin with one cut, and accordingly cuts through the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And accordingly, incise the ciplach according to what we have recounted; and it is signified on the section of the canal by the flame which is from that side and is disordered and broken off due to the abscission of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is ripe in which perforation is to be feared, add two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew it up alone, except for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, administer medicines that make the flesh new until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the summary of this sermon which we have recounted is an exposition not to show that some of these abscesses have already filled up the groin of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and his soul is exhausted, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the location of the wound through some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and it is the malice of that place for three days; and then I command to close the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my eyes is that a servant took a cauterizing iron and applied it to his groin, and incised a part of the canal of the lung, and you were called to the cure of him, and he began to groan as if groaning from the dying, and discovered the wound and extracted the blood which was situated in the little wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you were confessed that he had not incised a vein nor an artery, and the breath was coming from the wound, and cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And he did not suffer any harm except for some roughness in his voice, and accordingly, after several days, he returned to an improvement of his physical condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say to you that there is no fear in the section of the epilhot.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on abscess that occurs in the groin outside, and is called a hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess is called a hernia of the groin, which is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no need for cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to grassy nodes, and the other manner is similar to abscess which is caused by a constriction of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to make presumption about it unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should proceed with that and investigate it according to what is said, and if you find it similar to grassy nodes, and not suspended from any of the veins, then you incise it as with the nodes, and extract it with water that contains the peel and bursiclam; and otherwise, then thoroughly examine the entire being, and accordingly cure the location where healing is needed until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes many species and I have already said all the species of theirs in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between a node and an exitra, so as to dispel doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that with exitra there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is sedated; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that cartilage-like substance which is in its own sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and it is made thus like a pouch, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either they are grassy and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you expose it and inquire into it at the beginning with a instrument which is called an intro-mes, according to what its form will appear in the chapter which is next to this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid part of the abscess, and you turn the handle thus little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the cord.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And accordingly, finally, your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and accordingly extract the intro-mes and consider what is situated in its place.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture which flows is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the place of the intro-mes there is no moisture, then you know that it is grass.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	just as I have taught you, and suspend it with a needle, and excise the cord from all parts with ease, and preserve the skin or sack, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and often times end up with this, and accordingly you extract it by pieces until there is no longer any cause from there.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if from there remains no cause, a little or too much, the node will return as before.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that from there remains a small part, then complete the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and pause over it which has abscessed cautiously, and cure that other way until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a great node, then you sew the two lips of it and cure that with water which nourishes.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsating vein is on the opposite side, or non-pulsating, then you compress and apply a wet compress to the location of the gauze, which is vitriol, and leave it so for two days or three until the wound becomes firm and the ebullition of blood subsides; and accordingly return to incise that which remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, the forms of intro-meses, and of three species, that of which is great, and of which is medium-sized, and of which is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the great intro-mes is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized intro-mes is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small intro-mes is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, with a pointed end, and curved extremities that descend in a gentle slope, for the purpose of fixing the instrument in abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are called "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three species, that of which is great, medium-sized, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experiment, shape of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium-sized experiment, shape of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experiment, shape of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Conveniently so that they are for those abscesses, exitrae, fistulae, and bubae, and also for the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus they are made round, thick, and long, like great needles with which the stitches are sewn together, and they are made of earthenware citron, or of iron, or of silver, And the best ones are when they are made of earthenware citron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black plums, which are adapted to those that are plentiful the fistulae in the concavity of which there are reflections, which are reflected in their lightness with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three species, that one of them is long, and the others medium-sized, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the great experiment of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized experiment of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small experiment of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are of many species, that one of them is simple, with only a single curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And among them there are iron needles, and there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those, there are needles with two curvatures, and there are three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those, there are needles with three curvatures, and there are three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple needle, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple needle, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of an iron needle great one:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of an iron needle medium-sized one, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of an iron needle small one, shape of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large needle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized needle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small needle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large needle having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized needle having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small needle having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels with which one cuts and scores nodes and abscesses, and there are three species, that one of them is great, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not paused in such a manner, but rather so that it may be done gently in the excision of nodes to avoid the danger of incising a vein or nerve, and for this reason the patient is cured and afterwards tranquility is found a little due to the adaptation which is obtained from the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of ligatures, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small, just like threads.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large ligature:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium-sized ligature:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small ligature:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of earthenware and resemble rays, with which one makes alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the lateral extremity that one makes a small puncture with a hidden spatula and in that corner runs the partitions inwardly and outwardly, whenever you want, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers when one performs the puncture of abscesses and do not touch the patients, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of absorbents with which one absorbs the flow of blood, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small; their forms are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of earthenware citron, rounded with some length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these species of absorbents are great, medium-sized, and small, for the purpose of absorbing the flow of blood with velocity when needed, and accordingly when first aid is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, one does not use those to absorb blood in all parts of the body, and one uses them only in fleshy areas, such as in the crevices of the hips and buttocks, and in the creases of the arms, and breasts, and belly, and groin areas, and similar to their fleshly counterparts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes they are made of those small instruments resembling scissors according to this form; by which blood is absorbed when it is done through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of men's breasts which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of certain men become inflamed due to the excess of sleeping when they start getting older, and accordingly, the breasts are swollen, and similar to those of women, and abscesses form at a distance.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who is afflicted with this, it is necessary to incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and accordingly excise all the gangrene, and accordingly fill the wound with an incarnate medicine, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound with sewing, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast sinks into the partitions and is softened by its magnitude just like in women, then it should be cut in two parts from top to bottom, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one is contained within the other, until the major line contains the minor one according to this form of the line of B and the line of G. And accordingly excise the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the swelling, and administer the liquid we have said about suturing and the powders which are necessary for healing until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which is necessary to be cut due to the unease of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a submergent poultice in corrosive gauze and leave it until the corroded part that remains of the grayish color is gone, and accordingly cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the puncturing of abscesses that come left behind the titillate.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those abscesses that come left behind the titillate are of the species of scrofulae, hard ones, which contain a sack.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the fluid that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then you should fill it with a warm compress and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, the compress should be applied and the wound should be cured with a suitable poultice until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and scrofulae, then you should cut it open just as we have said in the section on scrofulae equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended in such a way that it appears to be inflamed, then you should apply a cautery to it just as we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of abscesses that occur through artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the cord that is consolidated on top of it has become inflamed and an abscess has formed, then many times these signs are observed: for when an abscess is caused by an artery, it becomes long and aggregated in the forepart of the body; and when you press the abscess with those said fingers, you will feel a stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is caused by a vein is rounded to the visible part of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this abscess is in error, and more so in those that are left behind in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to avoid its cure with iron, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But over that which is caused by them through inflammation of the orifice of the artery, you should cut open the cord section in the long way; and accordingly, you will find the section with scissors and accordingly, you will tie off the artery, and deliver from the tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And accordingly, you will make a stitch on that with an needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to see your own eyes in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And accordingly, you will push the place between two ligatures with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is drained and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, you will administer care in which fire is generated until the ligatures fall away; and accordingly, you will cure that with suitable poultices to it until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is caused by an incision of a vein, then it is necessary for you to take with your hand as much water as is possible from the abscess and the cord, and accordingly, you will insert the needle left behind the place which you have taken with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract that from the other side, and accordingly, you will tie off the abscess with a single ligament as I have said to you earlier about the ligature of two parts at two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then accordingly, you will insert a double thread with the needle left behind all the abscess, through the incision of the first needle, and strengthen those threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And accordingly, you will cut off the abscess in the middle of it, until when what is left is in it, then you will incise the superfluity of the cord, and leave that which is tied to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, you will pause over the poultice which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and accordingly, you will administer care which is made with some and powders until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 on the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs through percussion or due to excessive strain, and by similar causes.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the most part of it in the places of the assistants or the heel, or in any place where the joints are damaged.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and is akin to the color of another body, and is in the major part of it disposed to its own kind, when it is stretched with vehemence, then in it the patient appears as if in a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the forepart of the body, and therefore it is left behind the cord, and it is damaged to all parts and does not go to the parts before or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which is in the joints should not be incised with iron, for very lightly it would result in contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or forehead should have the cord cut open with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it's a small abscess, then take that with forceps and cut it open with razors.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it's large, then you should suspend that with threads, and excise that, and accordingly remove that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of abscess which occurs due to inflammation that occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	I have observed in some men that many times in their bellies and in other parts of their body those things which are called fungi by similarity to those with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head of that is thick; and already the lips of those are conversed, and it is of those who is small, and it is of those who is very magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in the belly of it were two things which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with a subtle root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inwards and split open, and moisture flowed from that at all times.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore you should incise those and insert them into the one in a weight of 18 ounces. and the other, weighs 6 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the thing is white, humid, with a subtle root; then you should incise it with a spatula, and be present when you have cauterized it over fire, because many times the section of it must expel much blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is weak and fearful, be careful not to incise with iron; but rather take a lead thread of recent making, and strengthen that thing, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And accordingly, adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly on that thing, until it is cut off and falls away by its own weight.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if that thing is of great root, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and terror, and most especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But possible is that you incise the greatest part of it, and accordingly cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And accordingly, cure that until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to incise that thing which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and with little regard, for that is absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will find it to be a memory of cancer accordingly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the care of the navel prominence.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The navel prominence is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the cicatrix which is on the belly, and you see that it is torn away or bundled up according to what is seen in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery, as has been said before, or by coarctation of the ventricle in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the cicatrix and the bursting forth of the navel string, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and accordingly, it appears in different situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the bursting forth of the navel string, then the situation of that with water as we have recounted, is with a more violent diversity; and when you press that with the threads I mentioned, it is hidden, and accordingly returns; and very quickly it becomes so, and is magnified much by the introduction of bath and violent labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if due to humidity, then it is not so, and does not hide when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or believed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if due to blood, then accordingly, the abscess appears with these signs declining towards blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to nothing but flesh, then accordingly the abscess is a severe one, large and hard, and is situated according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to coarctation, then accordingly the touch of it is like nothing.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or coarctation; accordingly, it is necessary for you to be prohibited from treating it, because in that there is fear and terror just as I have taught you in the chapter where I described abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the navel string or the cord, then accordingly you should command the patient to take hold of his own navel and be standing upright; and accordingly, sign with a tent in the circuit of all the navel, and accordingly, command him to stay between your hands on both sides of his navel, and accordingly, surround it with a spatula in the circuit of the navel over the place which you have marked with the tent; and accordingly, extend most of the abscess above into the upper parts with threads; and accordingly, tie it off in the circuit with strong thread or with cord, and the manner of tying should be decent.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And accordingly, take the middle of the abscess, which is extended over the ligature, and insert the said thread into it and seek out the navel string; and if you have found or guarded it by the ligature, then accordingly, extract the abscess and push the navel string down to the lower parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cord, then accordingly take that with threads; and incise the superfluities of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then accordingly circle that place, and accordingly return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads, and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, so that they will penetrate; and accordingly strengthen the abscess in four parts above the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the flesh extends and falls away by itself; or incise that when it is subtlety and becomes soft, and accordingly cure that with water as needed until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to nothing but flesh or humidity in it, then accordingly you should conquer the abscess as we have said and remove the blood or humidity which you find there, and accordingly cure that with water as needed and consolidate the place.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the care of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division, about the species of cancer and how it is treated with medicines, and what is to be avoided in treating it with iron so that it is not ulcerated; and we have said that cancer is generated through excessive care and caution in treating it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, just like breast cancer or abdominal cancer and their similarities to the members allocated to remove all of it, and most especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and great, you should not attempt to treat it, because you will not be able to heal it at all nor have I seen anyone else do so, nor that it has been brought to a good outcome.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in this case is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge him of black cholera some times, and accordingly apply a poultice to that place if a manifest repletion has been found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And accordingly, prepare the patient with preparation for the operation in which the place is located, and accordingly prohibit in the thread threads that are necessary for that; and accordingly concave all parts of the cord so that it is good excision until there remains no cause of the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And accordingly, let the blood flow, and do not incise it slightly, and express the places, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal from among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find that the thick blood incision of the vein or artery causes contrariety to it, then accordingly cauterize that place until the flow of blood is stopped, and accordingly cure that with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter LIV.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the care of hydropsis.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, about the species of hydropsis caused by water, and the signs of each species, as well as its treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that one which is cured with iron is only the species of Althita alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of Timpanister nor to the species of Yposarca, because this is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydropsis timpanister with medicines and it has not been confirmed by your medicine, then accordingly consider whether the patient is already weakened or has another disease, just like if it is in the lungs or belly and similar to those, then accordingly beware that you do not treat it with iron, because fear is above this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of robust virtue, and there is no other disease but hydropsis alone, and it is not an infant or an old person, then accordingly the manner of the operation for that is that you lift the patient between your hands, and give them proper care, expelling the water from the belly with their own hand, filling the water at the part left of the pentenilh, and accordingly take a pointed spatula in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	with two sharp parts long, with a sharp extremity just like a spatula; but however, be in it some smallness little by little, so that in the operation with that you do not enter into the navel string, and lead those to.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And accordingly consider if the generation of hydropsis is from one of the navel strings, because then you should have the section move away from the navel by the quantity of three said parts to the left over, on the right side of it above the pentenilh.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydropsis is due to disease of the liver, then accordingly your section should be left of the navel by three said parts.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to melancholy, then accordingly your section should be in the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your section to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie down, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And accordingly pierce the entire cord with an instrument and accordingly insert it into that section, and lift your hand with a spatula between the cord and the siphac, and you will excise that; and if it is the quantity of one fingernail or thereabout.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And accordingly pierce the cicatrix until the spatula reaches the location where you want it to be, and that is the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And accordingly extract that and insert an instrument which has this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver canula; it is made of silver or of iron or of lead, and at the bottom part of it there is a small hole, and on both sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is incised according to the manner of a feather, just like when you:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the top of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that ring will soon descend upon the instrument, and accordingly evacuate from the water in a moderate quantity; for if you evacuate more than necessary at that hour, very quickly the patient will die due to resolution of their animal spirit, or you will cause injury to them which is close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from that according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what your observations indicate about the patient's disposition, the virtue of their pulse, and the good or bad nature of them.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And accordingly extract the instrument, and retain the water which is retained because it is held back by the cord which holds the hole that is on the cicatrix of which I have told you to pierce it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And accordingly repeat the instrument on another day if you find that the patient is able to tolerate this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for some days with caution, and beware of error until there remains only a little water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and let a large quantity of water flow, then accordingly cure that with burial in hot sand, and mix it with warm mud, and wait under the sun for a long time; and cure that with desiccative medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the melancholy and liver accordingly with the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted previously in this which has preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who are born with undescended testicles not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes one of the children is thus born from the belly of its mother and the head of its mixture is not perforated (or has a very narrow hole or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore it is necessary to pierce that with a perforation as soon as it is born with a fine spatula according to this shape:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And accordingly pause in the hole a small clasp made of lead and tie that one on, and leave it there for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when it is time to urinate, be renewed and flow; and accordingly return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not allow this to close.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that which has a narrow hole should be treated with a leaden clamp, just as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the hole is not in its place are led astray, and this is because of those who are born with the trait that is at the end of the penis, so that it cannot urinate downwards, but instead lifts the penis with its own hand upwards; and it is not a natural generation, therefore the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a miserable illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in this case is that the patient should be placed on their back, and accordingly stretch the head of the penis with your left hand with a vehement extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the location of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just like when you make an incision with a feather, or that you remove some part, so that the middle of it resembles the head of the penis and the hole falls into the middle place according to what is necessary.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because often this happens; and pause at the place where you will incise the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the affliction which occurs in the foreskin of the penis and its corruption, blackness, and adhesion to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this affliction occurs on the penis and is an excess of soft flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, requires that you suspend with a fine thread and incise it so that all the excess flesh is removed; and accordingly pause over the cut submerging it in Egyptian ointment; and accordingly cure it with diaphanous ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the affliction is malignant, of a bad color, then accordingly you must administer cauterization at the incision and the reason for it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the affliction is in the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis and one part of it is inwardly towards the foreskin and the other part is outwardly, then accordingly you should remove the afflicted part that is inwardly towards the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you will cure that which is outside, for when you cure that simultaneously with the foreskin, there is no guarantee that it will not become tangled.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And often it happens in the genitals and foreskin of blackness and corruption, therefore it is necessary that you scrape away all that which has already been denigrated and which already wants to corrupt or has already corrupted; and accordingly line that over with a mixture made with honey, which is mixed with flour of scoria of millet grain and with crushed and sifted errors.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And accordingly cure that with another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is an excessive flow of blood, then accordingly administer lunar cauterization in this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	for cauterization is beneficial at two dispositions together, namely the flow of blood and the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed completely in an instant, then accordingly it is necessary that you insert into the opening of the foreskin a leaden catheter so that the patient may urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those whose foreskin is intact and has not been circumcised; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) it is necessary that you excise with an obtuse spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excise those parts exactly, then accordingly you should excise with an instrument some cause at the head of the penis and foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, can be easily perforated by its own subtlety slightly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And accordingly separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of fine silk, which has already been moistened in water so that they will not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And accordingly it should be treated with a strong medicine until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and the cure of that which occurs to them due to circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuity in the same way as other wounds: but rather it is of our operation and our will, and that which occurs in it is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign in it a better operation and path more easily leading to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which is why many artists and barbers have found out to circumcise and purify with a razor and with torments; and they use ligatures with thread and incisions with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already condemned all these methods and did not find better purification with razors, with ligatures with thread that in purification like the nail, because many times you have escaped the cord above, because the foreskin has two tunics, and the lower tone remains below, and it is soon forced to another incision and sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification which is made by alalfa, and is delicate, of which barbers use, is not guaranteed to be a secure incision at the extremity of the male member, because it soon enters into the wound itself.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with nail, iron soon obstructs and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times they are so made that they do not need purification, and I have seen those.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But from the purification that is made with razors and ligatures with thread, I have discovered by experience that there is a flaw, because the razors are of proportional incision, therefore the acuity above is as much as the acuity below; and thus when you press your hand so proportionally on two acuities, and inscribe them according to one measurement in time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the penis from all parts, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child lie down as much as possible if it is one of those who understand a little, and not make anything except to tie the thread in its penis so only, and let it be for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And accordingly make that child happy in all that manner which is possible to you according to the intelligence it receives.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And accordingly make that child be between your arms most carefully prepared, and not at all anxious; and conceal the razors in your hand or leave them behind so that the child does not see those nor anyone else of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And accordingly insert your hand into the penis of him and blow into the cord, and pull that in until it is out at the head of the penis, and accordingly purify that which is accumulated therefrom, from sordid things.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And accordingly tie the marked place with double thread, and accordingly ligate lower down on that a little bit, and accordingly bind it with the said thread, leaving the location of the ligature below with good retention, and inscribe between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly lift the cord slightly and extract the head of the penis; and accordingly let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and pause powder above and on top of the powder, pause a cloth in which is spread a mixture of honey cooked with water and rose oil recently boiled; and lay that over it until the next day; and cure that with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the razors for purification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Be the extra tips not cutting and the others cutting, so that the ram of the key is not left, and the length of both edges be as much as the length of two equal hands.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is that soon you flee the internal cord entirely, or a part of it becomes detached from the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch that of your hour with your nail in front of the apostema of the location and incise according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then accordingly extract that with a thread and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and that which is inflamed below the penis has not subsided, then accordingly you should let it be until the apostema becomes calm, and excise that with facility, and incise that according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the penis, because it will not be at ease with this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And accordingly cure that with the powder which consolidates wounds, as we have recounted in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised with the cord according to measure, and obeys the parts above, then this will not be noticed by him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly cure that with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made by pain or by blood congested, or by a poultice or by flesh, and resembles those things that we have said about the ways of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention of it is seen to be caused by pain which is already in the neck of the bladder, then accordingly the patient should be supported on his own pillows.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And accordingly place the weights of that on his own back and stretch his belly from the part above his back, and the patient should strain his arm as much as is possible to him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, accordingly the neck of the bladder is strained to expulsion of the pain in the parts behind, so that the urine may be evacuated.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, then the cause of the disease is violent and requires a strong treatment, accordingly it is necessary to administer an extraction from him with an instrument which is called syringe, the form of which is as follows: It should be made of silver and very fine thread, like a needle with a subtle tip in the shape of a palm and a half, with a thin cane at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of extracting urine with this is that you take double thread and tie it in the extremity of the thread or cloth for good binding; and insert the extremities of the thread into the part below the ring, and inscribe with razors if there is any superfluous cause of the thread, but insert it into the needle with vehemence And accordingly, fill the ring with border and album of honey.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on a stool, and envelop the bladder of him with warm oil, olive oil, and honey.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And accordingly insert the ring with facility until it reaches the root of the penis; and accordingly double the penis above to the part of the belly; and accordingly push the ring into that part; and accordingly push that part into the bladder, so that the patient is brought to the desired cure, and not made in the same way as this order, but rather in a manner that goes against tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And accordingly stretch the thread with the cloth little by little, because the urine is eating away at the cloth.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And accordingly extract that and make it for urine cure, and use the ring, do not stop doing this and use the ring until the bladder is evacuated and the patient receives relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of catharticization of the bladder with clysteredra and similar instruments which are in accord with that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or apostema occurs in the bladder, or blood is congested in it, or the skin is constricted with poultice, and you want to make it distill waters and medicines in that place, then accordingly it should be done with an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	except that at the extremity of it is deaf, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two from one side, like so many times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a concave space, in which is poured water that fills it up to the quantity needed, plus addition, until when any cause is drawn out of the humidities with it, and then it is drawn back, and when it is expelled long, according to how clampcedra acts, as is written naphta in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to extract humidities from the bladder, insert the extremity of clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out with it the water that is poured into the parts above, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And accordingly insert the extremity of clampcedra into the penis according to what we have recounted in the ciringua; and accordingly pour out the humidity with water that pours it out, because that humidity comes to the bladder shortly, and the patient is cured thereby.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle clyster which is used to catheterize the bladder, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with the head being like a small feather, and below it a thin cane attached.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And accordingly take the bladder of a moving animal, and pause in it the humidity that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and accordingly tie it between two with a strong binding made of double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And accordingly insert the extremity of the clyster into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And accordingly press your hand upon the bladder with the humidity, stretching downwards until the patient feels that that humidity has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have the bladder present, then accordingly take a bag of parchment and make from it a circle; and perforate that entirely around its circumference; and accordingly insert a strong thread into those holes, turning them over; and accordingly add the circle just as it is added also in such a way that you pause on that which you want from the humidities, and oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And accordingly you tie that in the instrument and make it as you made for the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the Extraction of Pain.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of pain and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between pain generated in the lungs and pain generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said the pain in which catches operation with hand and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the pain generated in the bladder properly is that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you will narrate that with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So I say that the pain generated in the bladder mostly appears to children; and among its signs is that the urine which flows from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient frequently rubs his penis, and many times takes a step back, and accordingly it is dressed; and with this you will find the anus in the shape of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is more difficult to cure children of that until they have reached the age of 14 years; and it is a hard cure in old people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is easier because it is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And from that of which the pain is greater and the cure is lighter; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning to purify the patient with a clyster which extracts all the fissure that is in his intestines; for that fissure sometimes prevents the evacuation of the pain from its inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And accordingly be pressed the patient with his own weights and be constricted and narrowed in his joints so that the pain descends to the root of the bladder, or jumps from one place to another occasionally.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And accordingly make that patient sit between your most prepared hands and those of him be left the things of his, so that the bladder is made to decline entirely to the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And accordingly cover all that with a covering.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So, if you feel the pain in space, then immediately cut yourself off from it with section upon it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel completely the pressure of your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil the indicated spot on your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the middle spot if he is a young adult, and insert that into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And cover with oil of the pain until it remains below your said spot.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And accordingly press upon that with your said spot, and expel it into the parts outside of the bladder at the location from which you made the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the servant to press the bladder with his right hand; and command another servant to stretch out her left arm towards the parts above, and with her other arm to relax the cord which is below the genitals, in the part of the location where the section is being made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And accordingly insert an spatula which is incident, and this is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut through the flesh between the anus and genitals, not in the middle location, but above the left flank; and let the section be upon that pain and your said spot be on the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and thin below according to the quantity of pain that has been evacuated, and no greater, for then little by little the flesh will compress your said spot which is in the anus, and forgets its defect.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that of the pain is some which has an angle and corners, for which the evacuation of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that pain, there appears a node similar to a gland, and it is rounded, and it makes the evacuation of it lighter.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So, if it is that which has angles and corners, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not so forgotten, then accordingly you must gently press upon that, or strengthen upon that with decent gestures, the extremity of which should be as a file on which you would strengthen upon the pain, and not escape from it; or that you would insert below it a subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot press upon that, then accordingly you must amplify the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut it off with strength using a vitriolated thread.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the pain is more than one, then at the beginning you will push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and accordingly inscribe upon it; and accordingly push a little further on; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is great pain, then ignorance is that you inscribe upon it with great section, for it happens to the patient one of two causes: either he dies or endures the continuous evaporation of urine, because of which the location is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion from there until it is forgotten, or engineer in the fracture of it with razors until that comes out in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So, when you have completed your operation, then accordingly fill the wound with the juice of aloe and the blood of dragon, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause upon that cloth dipped in oil and vinegar, or in rough oil and cold water, so that the apostema may be cooled.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And accordingly repose the patient on his own pillow, and do not loosen the bond for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been loosened, envelop the location with water and hot oil, and accordingly cure it with divine ointment and devilish ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there occurs an apostema that is cautious, adjusted and corrosive, and from it appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known by the excretion of blood with urine), then accordingly insert your said spot into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will provoke the bladder to corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all species, as is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And accordingly note in all the hours of the entire cure that you have laid and adjusted the medicines which are paused upon the location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is small and is in the head of the penis, and is stuck there, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then accordingly cure that with what I have recommended before you come to the section, for too many times by this cure you are accused of section; and now I have already tried this, and it is that you take a perforator of iron like an alfalfa, the form of which is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extremity, pointed, fixed in a wooden handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And accordingly take a thread, and tie it around the penis below the pain so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And accordingly insert the iron into the penis, perforating with facility until the perforator comes to that pain.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And accordingly revolve the perforator with your hand in that pain little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make that from the other side penetrate; for the urine is soon abolished.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And accordingly press your hand upon that which is remaining of the pain from the departure outside of the penis, because it is torn, and it is forgotten with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not adapted to your equipment for any reason which prohibits it, then accordingly tie a thread below the pain, and another thread above the pain.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And accordingly inscribe upon the pain in that penis between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And accordingly extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And accordingly loosen the bond and purify the congealed blood which is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the pain, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread above, only because when the thread is loosened and approaches the evacuation of the pain, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary for you when you tie the thread above, that you raise the cord to the parts above, or that you complete your said action, and close the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the Extraction of Pain from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pain in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if there is pain in some of those (women), then it is difficult to cure it, and it is prohibited by many ways.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is too proud.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second one is that you do not find a woman well instructed that can recognize if she has been touched by a doctor when she is chaste, or is of women without husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth one is that the location of the section on pain in women is too far from the location of the pain, so you need a deep section, and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity prompts you to this, then accordingly take a woman who is well instructed, and not easily startled.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then accordingly seek out one who is quiet and subtle, or present a matronal woman well experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has parted from this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So make her present and command him to do everything that you will tell him, from the inquiry about the pain to the beginning; which cause is that he looks if the woman is chaste, then accordingly put his said thing into her anus and ask for the pain.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if you find that, cut it below his said thing, and then command him to inscribe upon it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not chaste, then command the matron to insert his said thing into the anus of the patient and inquire about the pain, since he places his left hand on the bladder, and compresses it with a good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if you find that, then accordingly gradually relax it from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of its virtue until it reaches the root of the canal.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And accordingly inscribe upon it the opposition of the middle of the anus to the root of the canal from which some part is brought to an end and centred in that part, and his said thing is not relaxed from the pain cut below.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at first; and accordingly insert the ray upon that section, and if you feel the pain, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know will cause the pain to be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of pain are many: for some are small and great, and sharp and rough, and long and rounded, and with nodules.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know how many species there are of that for which you signify upon that which you will.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust to the location with vitriol thread and tie it there for an hour until the blood is cut off, and then return to your operation so that the pain is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare with your own the instruments which are said in the extraction of pain in men, for so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the wound that is inscribed, then you pause powder on the location and strengthen it with powder and strict descent, and do not iterate this; and leave the pain and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And accordingly cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And then when the sharpness of the blood has ceased after some days, and the location is healed, accordingly you return to your operation so that the pain is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of the Section on Hernia Acuta.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aquosa is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white pouch which is below the cord of the genitals containing the fluid, and it is called a pouch.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper sac which nature has prepared for it in the part of the fluid, until another fluid is born; and it is the cord of the genitals between the white pouch which we have said, and it is not this but rather a tumor.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which occurs in the genitals, for it flows into them this material, and sometimes it happens through a blow made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has many colors, for the color of it either declines to citrine or blood-red, or red, or is blackish-feculent, or white as water, and it is this which is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is are these: for if it is in the white pouch which we have said, then the apostema is rounded and declining a little towards length, thus like the figure of a fluid, and appears the genitals, because the humidity contains that from all part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper sac, then the apostema is rounded with the part of the fluid and therefore one estimates that it is another fluid.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the cord of the genitals and the white pouch, then cats are born below the sensation.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the nature of the color of the humidity, then accordingly you test the color of the humidity in the apostema with entromes which precede its form; and according to what is found in the vestige of the entromes, judge from that what is below it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And then when we come to the cure of it with iron, accordingly command the patient to be flaccid if this is possible for you, and sometimes let his body please.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And accordingly it should be raised on the patient's back for some reason a little above, and pause below him many cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And accordingly set yourself on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on the right side of him, which stretches his arm to one of two sides to the cord of the genitals and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And accordingly take a spatula and cut the cord of the genitals from the middle location by its length to the proximity of the pubic hairs.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the section should be made according to right proportion, equally distant from the line that you must draw on the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white pouch including.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excavate that, and observe, and be careful for yourself so that you do not inscribe that; and your excavation with which you excavate by part below as it is suspended in the fluid most and subtly scrutinize the excavation according to the quantity as possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And accordingly pierce the white pouch full of water with a broad perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And accordingly separate between the two lips of the section with an incision, and extend the white pouch to the parts above; and do not touch the cord of the genitals including, and inscribe the white pouch in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And accordingly inscribe that with its totality or in pieces, and mostly the subtle side, for if you do not scrutinize the inscription of it exquisitely, there is no certain guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the fluid proceeds from that outside of its cord in the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white pouch, return to that and accordingly adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suture, and accordingly cure that just as with other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the fluid corrupted by another disease, then accordingly you should ligate the vessels which are sore the suspensori, and extract the fluid, and accordingly cure that with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the fluid is aggregated in two separate parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore inscribe that part according to what you have done on the other in equal manner; and if it appears to be one operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And accordingly you should wash the wound, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or rose-colored oil; and pause before another wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over two genitals and the miracle of the belly; and pause above folded cloths and powder, and tie those above with a thread which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and accordingly be pressed two cloths and be filled with cuminated wool according to this likeness; and be made the extremities at which it is necessary to be cut off or moistened with wool, and be added to structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities take from the backside to the back, and the other takes to the part of the pubic hairs, and two extremities above two canals below and two other extremities above two gonads, and all structure shall be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cauter in place of section with iron; and it is that you take a cauter cutlery subtle and inscribe on it the cord of the genitals, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white pouch containing water is revealed, and then you take the cauter in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled into Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And accordingly pierce through that white pouch, and ignite until all the moisture has been drained out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And accordingly extend the white pouch with an incision, and excavate with an incision, and excavate with a subtle cauter ignited; and inscribe that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and be careful of the fluid so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more saved and more distant from bleeding flux, and better than an operation with section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter an apostema contradiction in the hour of section or in the hour of cauterization, or bleeding flux, then accordingly you should cure which contradiction comes to you through this, with a cure which is suitable for him according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is poor and does not hope for a second operation due to its horribleness, then accordingly administer a perforation according to what we have recommended here; and it is when you are certified by that which we have said about the significations, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And accordingly it is necessary that you should make the patient lie on some elevated stone, and then pierce the apostema in the lowest part of him with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of his body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the perforation broad so that it drains out all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And accordingly pause on the location cut and tie it and leave it, so that it drains out the remaining water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And accordingly cure that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is opposition to the evacuation of water at that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for the reason that the white sac in the orifice of the wound makes opposition and prohibits the emission of water, then accordingly you should put into the wound a probe or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydrocele, the form of which is preceded; or adjust on the surface of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is added accordingly about 6 months or thereabouts; and when it is aggregated, then accordingly it should be pierced in the same manner, so that the patient thus will pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of the Section on Fatty Hernia and its Cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of being lost to destruction in the greater dispositions; for which I have seen the departure from it and being saved through that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation on this and the species of the apostemes.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore I say that the apostemes are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done so for many reasons: or because of acute and bitter superfluity which is poured into the genitals, or because of a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the apostema according to the color of the body, and not found in it pain, and it is a grave apostema.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very often it is a fatty apostema, the color of which is dark, and there is no sensation to it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is done through constriction of the vessels, and through inflammation of those things so that already the memory of it is perceived, or through inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But this which is due to inflammation of vessels is known through the dissemination of the apostema when you compress it with those things said above; and it does not need that it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But this which is due to inflammation of vein is not disseminated from it by any cause through compression with those things.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species a section may be made and on the other fleshes; and it is that you inscribe the cord of the genitals, and accordingly stretch the fluid to the upper parts, and extract it from the white pouch, and deliver the suspensori of the vessels, and tie them, and inscribe the suspensori more than what you deliver from all part of the fluids of the womb.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the fluid is already consolidated in those fleshy parts, then accordingly you should extract the fluid and inscribe it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the white pouch or between what is between the vessels, then accordingly you should deliver all that adhesion and inscribe it with a rounded inscription.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then accordingly you should inscribe all that is from it and extract the fluid as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then accordingly fill the wound with wool impregnated in rose-colored oil and wine; and then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the Cure of Hernia which is of Vine.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vine is an aposteme enveloped by some kind of wrapping similar to a bud in the softening of the testicles, and it is done with difficult movements exercised and walking about the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, it is due to fear because of that which is preceded by remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to say operation on that according to what the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to make the patient lie on an elevated stone; and accordingly impale the suspensori of the testicles at the parts below; and accordingly tie the cord of the genitals with those things said above, which are proved by the rod; and have another minister with you, and extend those things with vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And accordingly inscribe with a spatula broad and straight for a transverse section in the right of the vessels, until the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And accordingly excavate from all part as we have said above in extraction of artery which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And accordingly put an needle in those which is faithful double, and tie it at the first place of the places where it happens to be vine, and tie it another time at the last place of theirs.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And accordingly inscribe those in the middle location with a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added from the putrid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And accordingly cure the wound with a cure of other wounds in which you want to be generated for that reason that the vessels which nourish one of two genitals may not fall, because it is not evil for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the vine affects all the vessels, then accordingly it is necessary to remove the testicles or for the testicles to be severed from the vessels, in order that it may be deprived of all nourishment through the constriction of the vessels, and that they may become atrophied, or that it becomes so that there is no longer sustenance with them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the Cure of Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is by a section that enfolds in the white pouch extended over the belly from the parts of the gonads of the miraculous womb, so that those bags of rupture fall into some of the bags.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the white pouch or of excess of fluid, and it occurs in these two species for many reasons: or because of a blow, or because of sound, or because of noise, or because of elevation of some grave cause, or because of likenesses.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is when it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an aposteme which grows evenly into the preceding part because the white pouch compresses the bag.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it occurs by section of the white pouch, because at first it makes sudden and vehement pain; and it is an aposteme which appears different from what was previously apparent, and this is due to the emission of the bag, and the body of it towards the parts above the white pouch.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is forgotten with the bag, and it is called this intestinal hernia, also known as zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made with ventosity, and sometimes it runs in the bag's cleft, and stays there, and that is where great peril lies for the patient, and sometimes it causes a wicked and more intense pain when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of the species of this illness with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the caustic agent in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of that is that you command the patient to relax the bag with their own hand towards the parts inside their conquest if they obey your returnment, and accordingly be placed on top of his shoulder between your thighs, and raise the knees of him.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And accordingly tie the cord which joins the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and inscribe the cord of the testicles all along; and accordingly place it in two lips of the section incision as you need to irrigate the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that is possible for you, so that all the fluid is forgotten from that.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And accordingly excavate those pouches which are below the cord of the testicles, until the white pouch is uncovered from every part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And accordingly, you should intervene with your own hand in that which is said to be the testicle, between the white pouch and the one which is below the cord of fluid, and between the white pouch and the second one, and absolve from that adhesion which is in the part behind the fluid.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And accordingly, you should take hold of the cord of the testicles with your hand and extend the white pouch in its own direction with your left hand, and raise the fluid with the white pouch to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the fluid upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And accordingly, I say that there should be no cause for the bag to be enveloped in the white pouch hard.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause from it, then accordingly you should impale that into the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And accordingly, you should take a needle with a thick thread of 6 threads, and enter that into the last part of the white pouch, which is below the cord of the testicles, where there is the section; and accordingly inscribe the extremities which emerge from the thread until they are four threads, and accordingly compose some of them into a figure in the manner of a cross; and tie it with that white pouch of which we have said that it is below the cord of the testicles with strong binding of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And accordingly, you should envelop the extremities of the threads and tie them with a strong binding into the white pouch, so that some of the vessels which nourish those may not be able to transmit any cause for an aposteme to occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And accordingly, you should pause another time for a binding, after the first binding, at least three times; and accordingly, leave those two bindings on the white pouch which is below the cord of the testicles, in the quantity of the greatness of that, and inscribe all the remaining part according to roundness, and stop from there the fluid.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And accordingly, you should inscribe in the part below the cord of the testicles with a section from which blood and pus may flow as we have recommended above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And accordingly, you should administer wool immersed in oil and stop at the wound; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and sometimes the white pouch is cauterized, which we have said to be inscribed with caution against bleeding flux, because many times it occurs) and leave the binding until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the bleeding is delayed, then accordingly cold water should be poured on it, and pause over that until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, cure the wound with another cure of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	Of Hernia Ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there is no one who has been bold in the cure of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; which is that you lay the vessels accordingly above the section on that with facilitation of the fluid; and accordingly, cut off the middle part around the aposteme with water that opens up to those vessels.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the Disproportion which is made in the Gonads.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the gonads as we have said, and emerges the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is no cause for the genitals of the bags to be affected by the testicles; and if there is, it is little; and returns again in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, there is a fissure adjusted in the white pouch so that it descends into the white pouch; and this occurs because of the extension of the white pouch which is in the gonads as we have said, which cause is that the white pouch is stretched and becomes softened and the location becomes apostematized and emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for this is with a cauterization as we have previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and that the patient lies on his back between your thighs, and accordingly cuts off the location of the rupture of the apostemes which emerges by section along the latitude according to the quantity of three threads.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And accordingly, strengthen the white pouch that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And accordingly, take a needle and pause it over the elevated location of the white pouch, and press that onto the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And accordingly, close the two elevated locations on the extremity of the needle of the white pouch, and adjust with the suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And accordingly, extract the extremity of the needle, and do not inscribe the entire white pouch, nor extend the fluid, nor any other cause as you have learned in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And accordingly, cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you inscribe the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the white pouch is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this location, since it is more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it becomes fat for consideration.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who is treating this to make the patient lie on his back and inscribe all the cord which is softened onto the natural cord; and accordingly, adjust two lips with the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut off in the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And accordingly, inscribe between the sutures; and accordingly, cure by the cure of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by reason it is written to me that I remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except for two methods, one of which is because of the science of the doctor when he is inquired about it, who knows the cure of it which occurs; and the other method is that we many times have needed castration of other beasts for our uses from those, such as horses, and oxen, and pigs, and similar to animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by ablation or by incision at section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by ablation, the way of the operation is that we make the beast lie down in cold water until its testicles are softened and relaxed and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And accordingly, take those with your hand into the water so that they are resolved and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and section, you must have the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And accordingly, tie the suspenders and inscribe on each fluid with one section so that two fluids proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And accordingly, inscribe those more than you will excise.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those of the white pouch, except for the subtle white pouch which is above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this manner of castration is better which is done by ablation, for ablation leaves very little cause of the testicles so that the beast does not desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the Cure of Hermaphrodites.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodites in men are according to two manners: one is when it appears in what space there is between the cord of the testicles, where a female figure is formed as if it were a womb, and this has a male and female part.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from that there flows urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, there is one species: and it is that the womb of the woman over the pubis is as if two testicles of a man are joined together in a little less than half the part above, like the perineum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: one from the men and two from the women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you must inscribe those adjusted flesh parts so that the fear of that is removed, and accordingly cure those with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine flows which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for that.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of Linting and Eminence of Flesh due to Causes of Women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Linting is very little adjusted on natural causes until it is stretched and made firm the consideration; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and pours into copulation.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you must have the superfluity of linting with your hand or with an instrument and inscribe it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not leave any inscription, especially in the region of the rectum, so that the flow of blood is not interrupted.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, cure that with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But born flesh is flesh that comes from the loins of the mother until it fills up, and very little is issued to the parts above according to the semblance of a hen (and for this reason we also call this “diseased generation”); therefore, you must inscribe it as I inscribe linting, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the Cure of Hysteria.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hysteria is when the womb of the woman is not perforated or is only slightly pierced.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has preceded, and it is caused by flesh not well adjusted or by a subtle white pouch or thickening.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused in the lower back of the mother, or in the sides of her, or in the upper part of her womb, or in the lower part of her womb, and it prohibits coition and pregnancy and childbirth, and very little permits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of this is done by consideration of the meter, if the oppression is apparent, propounded; but if it is not apparent, you must search for it with the said threads or with a needle.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if oppression is due to a subtle white pouch and it is propounded on the two lips, you must cut and break that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you pause above the two lips of dust, and accordingly pause the said threads indicating both the upper and lower masses.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and accordingly extend the two lips with force until that subtle white pouch is broken and the oppression is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And accordingly, take wool and dip it in oil and pause it on the location, and make the patient lie down at home that day so that the location is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the white pouch is thick and dense, you must inscribe it with a spatula or with myrtle leaves.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the oppression is due to inflammation, you must suspend that with an instrument, and inscribe it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And take the medicines that make cease the flow of blood without scratching, such as aconitum, and blood of dragon, and gallbladder, adjusted with album of hen.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And accordingly, administer a leaden cannula widely so that the wound is not slightly consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for some days and administer cold water of lily.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural birth of other flesh, and you must inscribe according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to gangrenous aposteme, there should be no contradiction with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids and Tail and Red Bottom that occur in the Womb of Women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are a prolapse of many veins until those flow blood continuously; and when old hemorrhoids are formed, they become hardened.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have said in the division the species of those and their signs, and will also say which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and hardened veins when they are in the lower back of the mother and do not appear to the sense, therefore in those there is no cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the opening of the mother above which one senses, are those that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must put the woman in a warm place and accordingly extend the hardened veins with forceps or with rough cloth and inscribe them with the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And accordingly, powderize on those the flow of blood with one of the inscribable powders without scratching, such as aconitum and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And accordingly, press the patient's feet for an hour, and accordingly pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that person drink a decoction of samarang and scorched millet and mallows and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And accordingly, take oat flour and comfort that with honey and vinegar and make an ointment with water on the back of him.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is absorbed, it is good; and otherwise, make adhere to two blisters, and to the nipples with scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, take wool and submerge it in the juice of colocynth or in the juice of argemone or in the juice of guaiacum with vinegar and make adhere to the place; and accordingly, cure the place with poultices until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But harden the vein which is of rough observation, you must inscribe this as it appears to you according to what I have said in the equal measure.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the Perforation of Accidental Bleeding in the Womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of accidental apostemes occur in the womb, such as gangrenous and lapidated aposteme, ulcers, adhesion, erpetromen, fistula hemorrhoids, red bottoms, hardened veins, and other apostemes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have said these illnesses and their species and signs, and the cures for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is fitting that you say in this treatise of aposteme caustic which appears in the womb when it is one of the apostemes that college together to heal, and if you wish to know in what manner the operation is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore it is fitting that you consider if the pain of the aposteme in its beginning is acute with percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes blenches and if one senses above that a sensation, then do not cut with perforation of iron, and cure that with water which helps on maturity until the acuity of accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And accordingly it is fitting that you make the woman lie on a bed which has two mattresses; and recline her on her back and adjust her feet to the part most distant from the womb, and have her legs expanded, and pause her arms below her nails, and tie each one with a ligament to water suitable.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And accordingly the midwife follows the right path and administers the instrument with which the opening of the womb is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that are made to follow.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And accordingly when you wish to administer this instrument, you must make it with the ray of the back of the woman's womb, and that which is entered into the womb from the instrument should not be more than the back of the womb and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is greater than the back of the womb, then it is fitting that you powderize on the texture of the back of the womb so that the introduction of any instrument into the back of the womb is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And accordingly you must powderize the vertex that runs on the instrument from above and down, and the minister should hold the instrument and turn the vertex until the opening of the womb is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is warm and moist, then you must cut that with a spatula at the head of him.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the discharge is evacuated, then you must powderize on the wound a compress soaked in rose oil or green oil which has some stimulating quality; and pause the pressure in the section on the back of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And accordingly, pause above the mother and on the pubic hair a clean wool soaked in water in which mulberries have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, be cured after two days with poultice which is suitable for that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the mother is washed and the wound similarly as it is anointed with water and honey, and accordingly anointed with water in which the root of lily or aristolochia longa has been boiled, and accordingly returns to the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the mother's womb, then it is fitting that you are prohibited from the cure of him with iron, having cured that with water as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to medicate children when they are born with a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs from her, and it is that when you see the woman expel at the parts below and desire to smell the air, and above it is inclined due to what is on her part, and hasten the extraction of the child, then you will know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the extraction of him over his head, and the second birth with that or suspended or pendulous from the umbilicus.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is fitting that the belly of him be compressed so that the child descends slightly because when they descend upon his head, they give to him the second birth, and it is cleansed from those superfluities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another this part is non-natural and not to be approved, because when the child is born with his feet and the body of him is born before his head and his feet, and one hand or at the foot. i.e. or is born with his head and one hand or at the belly of him, and very little is converted on his back, and similar to the figures that are not to be approved.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing the whole figure of those, and what sign is in those so that it may be signified by this and has been on top.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the child is born on top of its head through natural eccentricity, and it is vehement upon the woman and has made a difficult part for him, and sometimes the virtue of him is already debilitated, then make that person drink, or have women give to him, and evaporate the womb with henbane and humus oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And accordingly introduce the midwife between the said spatula small and a fissure with that second birth, or cut that with her own fingernail until it runs with water which is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until it gives birth to the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not give birth, then it is fitting that the woman be anointed with a poultice of pimpernel and a poultice of fenugreek with camomile.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And accordingly command him to you, and command the anointing, that it be compressed and make her sneeze with conditions; and tie the mouth of him and his nose for one hour, because the child will soon be forgotten.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two arms of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then it is fitting that you reduce them with little ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then you must pause the woman on a bed and lift her feet up, and accordingly conceive the bed on the earth; and the woman is to be held so that she does not fall under the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the arms are not returned and the child dies, then you must inscribe those and extract the remains of the child or tie the body to the hand with cloth and extract that with equality, because it will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The Extraction of the Child from its Feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child is born on its feet, then it is fitting that you push them inwards, and accordingly convert the child little by little, and accordingly make equal that part, and accordingly take one foot of him and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are born into the thighs, then you must command him to come out, and make her sneeze with conditions, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten as we have recounted, then you must return the child little by little until it comes to the second birth according to natural figure, because it will soon be forgotten with easier extraction.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited according to all that we have recounted, then you must take musellage of althea and dissolved gum, and beat everything in the mortar for good beating, and accordingly line with water the womb of the woman, as far down as the belly of her.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And accordingly make that person drink in tepid water until they achieve the hips.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts below of him are softened, then make him inhale the vapor of myrtle and pause that for him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigation has lasted for an hour, then make her lie on a bed, and accordingly make her sneeze and stretch her mouth, and lift that away from her, and press the lower part of the belly of her with gentle compression, because the child will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The Birth of the Child on its Fingernails and Arms.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child is born in this form, then you must guide its arms little by little; and accordingly, have the woman lie on her back, and her feet hanging down, and those [arms] be placed on the light, and complete its arms.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And accordingly press on the belly of her little by little, and accordingly extract that which is behind the feet from the ears until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not forgotten, then take her feet and move them with violent motion, and accordingly press that which is above the hips little by little until the child can pass through the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And accordingly introduce its arms and equalize the child little by little, and command the woman to come out until the child is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The Birth of the Child Lateral to One of Its Arms.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be guided in the reduction of her arm, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the light, and conceive the thighs of her with strong concussion, and accordingly administer those which you have recounted of poultices.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth is over, then make her lie on a bed, and accordingly study the reduction of the arm, and equalize the child according to natural figure, and make her sneeze and command him to compress himself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The Birth of the Child with its arms expanded and the flesh of him at the two sides of his right side.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is fitting that the midwife hold the arm of the child and accordingly rotate it little by little, and equalize that with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and as much as is equalized, then pause over the womb of her that which we have recounted of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And accordingly command him to sneeze little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a bed and command him to be inclined over the right side, and accordingly command him to compress himself; and make her sneeze with conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The Exit of the Prepared Foetus from the Right Side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it comes to the horror of the right side according to this manner, consider, and accordingly you must inscribe the second birth with your own fingernail until it is evacuated from humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended over the face and neck of her, then you must inscribe that from the navel, in order that it may not be retained and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And accordingly push the child into the lower parts until it comes out according to what is fitting, and command the woman to compress herself sometimes, and if God so wills, it will soon be forgotten with easier extraction.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The Exit of Twins or Multiple Foetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that sometimes twins are born, and occasionally three or four, but this is rare and not to be wondered at; however there are causes that are natural, and not living.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And contain those, whether they are multiple or not, one second birth, and separate them by caesarean section, distinguish those from the bond in the umbilical cord of each of them; and sometimes some are forgotten thus as is one child for easier natural extraction, and some are extracted sometimes through non-natural extraction just as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about non-natural figures, then you must cure those just as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does that which facilitates and subtlety, and with delay, and is guided according to all figure as it is prepared by the ingenuity leading to salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are found to be fertile in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even up to ten months, and you should verify that a woman aborts at the sixth month, while another conceives again with all the numbers, which is caused by measurement of the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is to be in the science of the midwife because it is very similar to that, and therefore pause at that with what is fitting.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extraction of the Child when it is Dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead child with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not otherwise extracted, and you are forced to use operation with force, then it is fitting that you consider whether the woman is of good virtue and not affected by any of the accidents by which perilous loss may occur upon her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is fitting that the woman be inclined over a bed on her back, and her head lowered down and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister must hold that in two parts or tie it in a bed for so that her body does not stretch out during the extraction of the child.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And accordingly moisten the mouth of her with oil and with humus oil and with poultice of althea and fenugreek and with seed of lily.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And accordingly anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and poultices, and accordingly introduce her hand with ease into the mother, and accordingly search for the exact location where the fingers should be placed on the child.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And when the location is convenient: then you consider whether the child is prepared to come out over its head, and accordingly place your fingers in the holes of it, or on the neck, or mouth, or palate, or below the chin, or at the furcula, or in the places proper to the chest, or below the hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the delivery is over the feet, then in the navel, or in the middle of the chest.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is fitting that you have the finger on the right hand, and pause the curvature of it at that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and introduce the hand with ease and place the finger in one of those locations which we have said, until you arrive at the cause of birth.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And accordingly pause and place another finger, or the third if necessary, in order that there may be equal attraction, and not extension only according to its straightness.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus it is good at all parts, in order that the extraction of him may be facilitated just as it is done in a tooth for the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is fitting in that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if some part of him is retained, then it is fitting that the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and introduce those expertly and revolve around what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the child is forgotten, then it is fitting that the fingers be permeated into the place where it is more high; and make thus until the whole child is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is extracted before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then it is fitting that a cloth be wrapped around that; and accordingly extract that until all is forgotten, and inscribe that either in the junction of the hand or in the thigh.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it is fitting to do so in the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the child is large, or there occurs contraction in the extraction, or the water is adjusted in the head of it, then it is fitting that you insert between the fingers the spatula with spines and split the head and drain the water, or displace that with one instrument which is called "alundat", whose form will come from the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is apropos to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do so if the child is naturally large-headed: and it is fitting that you inscribe that with an instrument called "algemat", or take that with an "alundat" just as we have said; and accordingly extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is extracted and is contracted at the furcula, then it is fitting that it be split into so that the humidity which is in the pelvis may be poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor obedient to extraction, then it is fitting that you inscribe the head at once according as it will be possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the remains of the womb are apostemated or are in a state of dropsy, then it is fitting that you perforate it until the humidity which is in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the child is on its feet, then it is fitting that the attraction of it be light and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is contracted in the womb and pelvis, then it is fitting that you extract it with cloth which you will wrap around your hand, and that you split the womb and pelvis into so that the water which is in them may flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are still and turn back the head, then it is fitting that you insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is swollen, then insert your right hand into the prepuce of layre, and search for that head, and draw it towards those fingers into the mouth of the mother, and accordingly introduce one finger, or two fingers, and attract him with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is contracted by apostema and it causes trouble to you, then it is fitting that you do not trouble yourself about it; before it is fitting to administer an effusion of humid and greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the child is on its own chest, then it is fitting that it be pierced: and anointed with water as we have said in the living child.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it is fitting that it be inserted into a pot and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is fitting that you leave no cause behind the second birth.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer the water as we have said for the cure of apostemes which occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there occurs a flow of blood, then you should induce it into astringent waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman in whose womb was a dead child, and accordingly on that same spot another pregnancy had begun, and accordingly the dead child is the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him that a long time ago an apostema occurred in his navel; and it swelled up into a hot inflammation, and began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called upon to cure him, and treated him for a long time, and the wound was not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed over him some poultices of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and accordingly after some days, another bone was extracted; and I was very astonished, since in the womb there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead child.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I bandaged the wound, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in her usual dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, bore a small child.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not marvel at this being strange, but because in this is science and aid to that which the physician by art and skill administers with his hands for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the child.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The shape of the uterus, which is opened up in the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a strengthener in which are joined the liberties, at which joining there are two uteruses in two extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this uterus must be made more subtle than the strictor, and made of ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the latitude of each stick is two fingers and a margin on both sides, one finger, and in the middle part of two sticks are two adjustments made by those sticks which are already fixed, of which the length is half a palm and a little more, and the latitude of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the mother so that it is opened up with them when you revolve the two prescribed uteruses.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another shape similar to that, more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Is made of ebony or boxwood sticks according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But in the extremity of it there are two additions like that, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the latitude of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then you must place the woman on a bed, her feet hanging down, and open up what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And accordingly place your hand on the instrument, as you would with forceps, in equal measure according to the quantity you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother until she does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the uterus which they called the "ancients":
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The shape of a prompter, with which the child is prompted:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The shape of a reducer, with which the large head is reduced:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps, with which there are teeth at the extremity, like times, and some times it is made long like forceps according to this shape, like times, with which there are teeth like the teeth of a saw, into which it is inserted and reduced.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The shape of a reducer little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The shape of a finger with one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The shape of a finger with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The shape of forceps to which there are teeth like a saw, with which the head of the child is reduced.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The shape of a spatula having two extremities, with which the head is split:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The shape of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of that and prepared by the artists, as much is easier for their operation and higher than what men can do by their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you must not omit to use those instruments in any case, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second birth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second birth is retained, then it is fitting that you command the woman to retain her breath, and accordingly make her cough, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of her and on her nose, and if by this means it is brought out, well it is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a cloth and perforate it in the lid of a casket and pause on that herb which burns the mouth of the mother, like calamus and rue and anise and camomile and Arabic scordium and cassia wood and saint-honorius.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And accordingly place a cane made of hemp in the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And accordingly make her cough as we have said, and the second birth is brought out quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure does not work and the second birth is not brought out, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sassafras oil or in a mixture of altaica, and accordingly insert it into the womb and seek out the second birth, and when you have found it, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is annexed in the prepuce of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recounted, and when you have found the second birth, extract it gradually, according to rectitude, so that the mother does not faint from the vehement attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Beforehand, it is fitting that it be permeated into the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And accordingly it should be adjusted in the quantity of attraction, for it will obey and depart from adhering.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is contracted, we have already recounted the cure with coughing and medication with the cloth and herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not brought out by all the causes which we have recounted, then beware that you do not fatigue yourself in iteration of abstraction, but rather it is fitting that what has issued from there to the mouth of the mother lies at the side of the woman, and accordingly anoint it with enguent and tetra-pharmaceutical; for this will make it rot after a few days and be dissolved and brought out.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots, it rises to the bad authority of the head and stomach, and this leads the patient; and then it is fitting that sub- fumigations and conveniences should be administered according to what.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already been proven to use sub-fumigation with Nazitor and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of an instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menses and second birth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Is made of beaver or earthenware.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And is placed the subtle extremity in the womb and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is placed over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold it until that sub-fumigation is consumed and another iteration occurs.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure for the child's unperforated navel.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born with navels that are not perforated, which are covered with a subtle and opaque film.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is fitting for the midwife to pierce with her finger that film; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and take care not to touch the navel.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And accordingly apply some lanolin infused in wine and oil; and accordingly cure that with unguent until it is clean.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may be obstructed, then place a tube in the wound for many days, and remove it when the child will desire to evacuate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is obstruction of the navel due to consolidation of wound or aposteme; then it is fitting that this consolidation be pierced, and accordingly cured with water as we have said for the cure and with lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the cure for the fistulas which are left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that are left behind in the departure, which are lower down and thicker, and those that are located near the navel outside or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a single fistula or multiple ones.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is antiquated and flows with white or subtle pus, and some of these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that are penetrating are known by what is issued from them through the egress and ventilation; and sometimes the patient uses the egress, and then a little blood is issued from them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas penetrate into the space and enter the bladder, and into the urethra of the penis; and some of those that are penetrating enter the juncture of the thigh and into the notch of the hip.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the way to know whether a penetrating fistula enters the navel and does not penetrate is that you place your finger inside the navel, and then carefully introduce a thin probe made of earthenware or iron into the fistula when there is no resistance.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is resistance in that, then insert into it a subtle probe made of lead or the fur of a horse until you feel the probe or the fur on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all or there is no passage of the tube from any cause of emission, blood, or ventilation, just as we have said, then you will know that it is non-penetrating, and accordingly, consult with the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then the significance of it is issuing forth with urine from that place and prohibition of it to such an extent that the location where medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the juncture of the thigh or into the bone and causing intense pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe will enter here if there is no resistance in the bone, and intense pain in the circuit of the departure; and that from there pus will flow constantly; and that it does not take with that medication, nor is consolidated with unguent.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is not complete cure, and the cure of them is the toil and vexation of the learned physicians on which we have fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and does not decay, the healing with iron is expected according to what I have recounted and proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies down between your knees above his or her back and raises their legs up to yours, with the thighs sloping towards the belly of the patient, and accordingly inserts a probe made of lead or earthenware into the fistula if there is resistance, until you know the location where the probe fits.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the navel, then it is fitting that you insert your finger into the navel.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already having gone in and penetrating, or if you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and accordingly, do not trouble yourself with it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some people may say that it cures in some cases, although it may not always be so.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which one hopes for improvement in that is that you make a subtle cauterization according to the size of the fistula, just as has been preceded, and then insert that ignited substance into the fistula until it pervades around the navel; and accordingly repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those adjusted fleshy parts that are resembling the quill of an eagle have been adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And accordingly cure that with calques wrapped in parchment until all those adjusted fleshy parts are cooked; and accordingly cure that with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is cured, well it is; and if not, then it will not be cured in any time through another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe goes in and does not penetrate into the navel which is in the navel, and between that and the probe which is a subtle specer of flesh or film, and the fistula is opened on that surface where the codon is, then dry the codon from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying with the probe, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the probe emerges, and by the probe is freed and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And accordingly, cleanse those fleshy parts that are gathered like the quill of an eagle and do not remain from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if the flow of blood comes and goes between you and your operation when you are cleansing those fleshy parts, then take a mile that is and use the least painful instrument to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire adjusts two good habits: it adjusts the adjustment of those adjusted fleshy parts, and abscizes the blood excess of humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And accordingly, cure that with calques wrapped in parchment or in three-fold cloth until the wound gets its breadth, and accordingly, cure the wound with unguents of hard flesh that generate and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines which have astringency and excess; when it is restored, then it is healed and you do not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has penetrated into the perineum of the navel and is elongated from its surface on the body, then insert your finger into the navel and investigate with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if you find the probe and it is subtly of film or flesh, and is propitious to penetration, then there is no operation in that place except according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in that place one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it out until you achieve the conquest of that place so that it is possible for you to insert some and apply the propitious cure; and do not proceed with drying because you do not want to insert the navel containing the belly, and what happens is that the patient's will is expressed; and accordingly, cure that with water as we have said, because very soon it will be healed; or elongate that film and cleanse that pus that dries out there into the propitious place, just as we have said, either with a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and accordingly cleanse those fleshy parts fistulated which are in the drying process until you can perform percrustation; and accordingly, strive to achieve the restoration of all the wound with drying, and if the upper opening is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open on the side of the navel, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the navel area around the surface of the body with the coden and on the margin of the navel, then take a tentative perforation that is like an awl preparing the hearts according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that faithful wrapping of five faithful ones or around those; and accordingly, insert the probe with faith in the fistula until you achieve the conquest of that place.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrating in the margin of the navel proper to the backside, then you extract the thread from that channel and insert your finger into the navel; and extract the extremity of the thread and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or two, and when you have inserted the thread into the flesh, strengthen it well so that those fleshy parts are stitched which are between the two extremities of the thread and fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And accordingly, cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, but not in the navel, for it is not your place to do so; and accordingly, do that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatulum with which the fistula is divided: its curvature is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so that you do not insert what is unnecessary, just as sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the insertion of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the navel like coal, or those that are like grass on a rye field.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those that are small and large, and that the blood flows from them constantly and is one, or many, and that they are outside the navel, and in the extremities thereof.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But however, those that are outside the navel are according to the degrees of little humidity, from which clear water or a small amount of blood flows with continuous flow, and according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is behind the navel is that you command the patient to settle and to be quiet until the navel is cleansed and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then take hold of them with your nails or what you have, and accordingly cut off those roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not caught in those due to their moisture and softening, then take those with a rough cloth or with a thread or with a woolen floss, and extract those with your fingers, and accordingly cut off those roots and powder some powders suitable for cauterization near the incision, so that they are applied to those places in place of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what has been preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And accordingly, cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the navel does not obey emission, then anoint the patient with a little mordicating ointment on the navel area, and wash it with that water which is in the navel and which will obey emission slightly when the patient is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the navel, then the cause of theirs is light, and it is that you take them with your fingernail or with a small knife, and cut off those roots, and accordingly cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And he who has an incision, must minister the suturing of them according to this way: take a thread wrapped around and insert that into the needle and accordingly extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make it penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the thread in the more distant part of the needle, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and accordingly remove the thread and needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one alone and don't cauterize it, so that the superfluity of blood flows from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And accordingly, press a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate onto the navel area, and press that onto the navel and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, leave that alone until it forms a scab; and when it is scabbed over, cure those with unguents or other remedies until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	The Cure of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times accidents happen due to excess of fissure or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are ancient and do not work with that medicine, then it is necessary to cut them off at the point of spatula or with your fingernail until they become moist and host the scab above, which prevents consolidation; and accordingly, cure those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must cut those off at the root, more fiercely than the first time, until they bleed much and are excoriated; and accordingly, cure those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The Cure of Almesamir, is key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that Almesamir is key, and it is not so unless the notes are red on the color of the skin resembling a cap of clover, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts left behind by the feet and hands, and it involves through those pains the desire for love.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to cut out what is in the circle of the key, and to hold it with forceps or small knives, and to eradicate its root; and accordingly cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But of verucca, it is a small, hard, fistulous prominence on the surface of the body, and many times appears in the majority of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for it is to stretch and cut it off, or to strengthen it with a thread or a piece of cloth until it forms a scab.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that according to what we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already removed inwards and outwards with the instrument which you will say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But formica is a small, fatty or fistulous prominence on the surface of the body approaching the navel, and when it is touched by the finger, it seems to be bitten by an ant, and is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a reed pen or a votar pen, and it should be strong, and press that on the formica until it contains the circle of the pen in its parts; and accordingly revolve your hand with the pen until you cut out what is in the circuit of the formica, and then pause that in the navel of the flesh, and that eradicates the formica from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do it with a reed pen or an iron pen according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Be the upper part of the pen tip slightly sharp, not perforated, wrapped in order that on the said part of the skin, the ablution of it may be performed and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the formica according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterizing.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The Form of the Instruments that are Administered to Give Cautery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes it is made cauterization of silver or lead or melted iron or hammered; and sometimes it is made with those small and large instruments according to what is administered, for that which is administered in the cure of little children is small; and of those whose buttocks are rough or sore, their cauterizations shall be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The Form of Great Cautery.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the reed pen above, in which the bag is tied, should be broad according to this way; and there should be a distinction at the point where the bag is tied, just as sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it, which is inserted into the navel, should be blunt (not open) like a lion's tooth, with subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker than small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And it should be a bag in which medicines from the bladder of an animal or sheep's wool are placed, and the root of it should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with many small holes just as it is rolled up; and if the space between the holes is the thickness of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And accordingly insert the needle into those holes, a strong thread of raw thread which is made from ten threads, or surround them; and adjust that bag to it; and when the bag is placed in it, be tight in the head of the cauterizer between two distinct ones with strong constriction, and accordingly cauterize each hole: But the quality of cauterizing is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and take care that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And accordingly the patient should be laid on his back, and raise his knees towards himself, and pause there until one cup is left above which men or lansol; and accordingly apply a small amount of oil or album of honey or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances to the extremity of the cauterizer; and accordingly insert that into the navel with ease, and accordingly the minister should take the bag and express all that is in the cauterizer into the bucket with two hands and sometimes with great vigor until everything is evacuated from the cauterizer; and accordingly extricate the cauterizer and the patient will lift his knees to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to sleep similarly, hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, it is more likely to lead to good results.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cauterize that in the diseases of belly flux and navel inflammation, then you must iterate the cauterizer until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the navel there are hemorrhoids or apostemas, then it should be a cauterizer very subtle and lion-like, of those cauterizers with which children are cured.
De curacio de las plaguas.	The Cure of Sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And thus I have said in the division of the cure of sores above what is fitting for a free person, and I say thus: the cure of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that sores are diversified according to how they are made and according to the place on which the sores occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many times sores are made are just as if from a blow of peyra, or incision with space or cotelet, or striking with lance, or with fist, or with arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the sores that are on the parts of the body are like a sore which appears on the head, or on the neck, or on the feet, or on the belly, or on the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the cure for some sores by which you pause that rationalization and rule on other sores.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the sores of the head, simple ones, for the remembrance of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third capital.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say: when a simple sore occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider this: if it is due to a blow from a peyra or similar, and already the wound has opened so slightly that it is a large sore and you fear about that patient having an apostema or cauterization, then you must immediately take hold of the cephalic vein and bleed, but not too much; and extract as much blood as necessary according to the quantity of the virtue of the patient's blood, unless there be some other cause prohibiting bleeding, especially if the blood that has issued from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And be the bleeding on the opposite side of the wounded part; and watch out for the patient's replenishment, and their diet, and their hearty food.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits from the beginning, then it is advisable to minimize food and not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the sore, if an apostema cauterization occurs, cut in with rose oil or wine that is stipticated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is sure of apostema cauterization, then pause on the sore, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend as proper little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that one, then pause on some other unguent until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the sore is large or is due to incision with space and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pus, then adjust those with suture according to what I recommend for their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the sore is already uncovered of bone and flesh, and there is no retention of it but a small suspender, then cut into that and accordingly cure the sore with medicines and restore the flesh according to its location, and command the patient to eat food in which there is grossness: caps and forms of meat and similar things until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the wound putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all that is putrid and rotten, and accordingly cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood flux can occur, and it is not abscessed by medicines, then you must inquire about the artery, and if you find that one not incised, then cut into it with spatula, or tie it; and if necessary, it will cause what we have said not to conform, then you must cauterize until the blood is absorbed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore you must powderize on those this powder, because it will consolidate before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take one part of oil of enses, two parts of blood of dragon, and three parts of non-extinct cause; mix it well and crush it thoroughly, and fill the sore with that powder, and constrict it with good constriction until it adheres to the sore, and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly stretch that powder above with powders and loosen it, and do not remove it while it is like this, so that the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes one makes this alone with caustics, when it is not present to you in the same place as the oil of enses and blood of dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And already this method of operation is done in large sores when it is necessary to pause on those and be stretched, and these sores are recent with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the time of summer, then do not take thought about the position of this powder, but instead cure those with what we have said, namely by applying some ointments that are dissolved, or by applying powders made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until they produce a poultice; and accordingly cure those with another remedy until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a fracture in the bone near the sore, and it is small, then you must extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will say: the cure for fractures of the head in this way that is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	The Sores of the Neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the sore occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple sore of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or arteries, then if it is a nerve, do not apply a caustic to it, but rather avoid applying a remedy that causes strong stipticity, such as vinegar and eggs, which are like vitriol and similar things that harm nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any cause to the sore that is completely cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is in the brain, which is the most noble of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured by medicines is light, just as it is washed with lukewarm water, some day infused in rose oil or un-rose oil, and thucia when it is washed with lukewarm water and the other minor wounds are treated according to this method, and ointments moist.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the sore is large, then you must apply suture, or compress the lips of it, and accordingly cure that with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the sore is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the poultice, then you must pierce that in the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the sore already has an incised artery and there is a flux of blood, then you must separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessity requires it to happen.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or all have been incised, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you must adjust the lips of the spine with suture over the canal of the neck and do not touch that; before equalizing it and reducing it to its natural shape, and accordingly strengthen it with decent tension, and loosen it for some days; and accordingly cure that with ointments in which there is stipticity and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the sore has made a impression in the bone, then you must pierce it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; and as for what is not attached to you, loosen it until the sore subsides, and be separated, and the excrescence of it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the sore is recent, then powderize on it the powder which I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the sore has made a fistula, then cure that with what will come to mind in its own capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	The Sores of the Neck or Similar Ones when Made Between the Shoulders and is Made with Space or with Cotelet or with Lance or with Similar Things.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a blow from a lance or cotelet, and the depth of it is great, then consider more whether the sore is ventilated when the patient complains; know that the sore is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no great depth and the sore is recent with its own blood, then pause in it on the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and does not return to the heart and does not harm the patient; but pause in it attractive ointment, and remove it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then pause in the orifice of the sore a little bit so that it sucks up what you have from the humidities; and make sure the patient sleeps over the sore so that water flows in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the sore occurred and the patient does not experience spasms, nor trembling of the heart, nor constriction of the bile, and other good dispositions are present in them, then know that the sore is saved; and then cure it with calques and with another remedy until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is excluded, and all time has been opened, then know that already a fistula has been made; cure therefore that according to its own capital.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the sore is due to incision with space or cotelet, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with what precedes suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the sore has made an impression in the bone, and there are pieces of bone that are separated from it, then you must twist the sore and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then loosen them until the sore subsides, which will alleviate the extraction of them.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other sores that occur in other members, the judgment in cure is the judgment of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	The Sores of the Belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, small, or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great ones, some times you will see the belly or nerves of the belly, which is made with an introduction of theirs and the suture of theirs being more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is made difficult by another way, and it is known that the reduction of theirs is more difficult, if you do not take care to introduce them into their place as soon as possible, for it opens up and becomes swollen, making the instrument of them difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, for in that one there is not difficult the reduction of the belly, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the belly is according to four methods, but two sutures are common ones that are necessary in sutures of other sores of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are proper ones that communicate with other sores, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you whatever explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the sore is small and there is some cause from the belly for it, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then this is in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the belly has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, you must then scrape it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or wet cloth in tepid water, or that you gather sanguinary, cypress, and spike, and embrocate with that on the belly until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes I have found that this [treatment] has a certain sharpness, and it is better than just water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, then you must moisten the belly with water in which is cooked aloe and mulva, for by this it is alleviated the instrument of it with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of it is excused from this cure, then you must divide the disruption into small pieces with an instrument in which are incised emoryddos.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is proper and not necessary to cut, and there is no occupation to cut at the time of necessity and faintness.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, it is necessary to know its shape.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is bent acutely, and the other part is not acute, and the extremity is subtle, and it should not be too fine, but rather a little obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the sore is enlarged and protrudes from the belly, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible above that, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their knees higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should support the head and feet so that they are higher than the remaining parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your attention and consideration always for that part where the sore is, so that it may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is necessary that you administer this in great sores and in medium-sized sores.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small sores, pause this which is according to your preparation, and make sure that the one who administers it is among those most skilled, who has the disruption entirely with his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and makes sure to uncover from this to another, for which there is some reason.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the needle according to the amount of amplitude of the sore; and then leave from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or twice, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the cord, with the two extremities of the ciphac that is left behind the cord of the parts inside, until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, and so there are four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread with the needle, and sometimes on two parts together, and then add the two lips and the sore by decent addition; and then leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in it, and then bind that with thread just like the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the sore.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be medium-sized between thickness and subtlety, for the thin needles only slightly cut into the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to manipulate in the cord, and therefore it is necessary that they be medium-sized in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary to have the needle inserted in two extremities of the cord proper immediately, for fear that the flesh will be cut too little and the sore will be exacerbated before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the sutures should not be prolonged for fear that the sore will not be allowed to consolidate.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient's rest while sleeping; and place poultices spread out on all sides, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the sore is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of suture with needles in this manner are more suitable for small sores, for they can be completed with one needle or two or around that.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with a suture the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, at once, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped around in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce it to that middle part where you started, so that the thread will retreat from the highest point of the sore and return to the wound, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with which the cloths are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the amount of thickness of the finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture, I have closed the wound which had been inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been wounded with a knife, and was the disruption of a wound that was greater than one palm, and was situated around two palms from the navel, and was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the belly had been opened for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and cured him; and then I watched over him for some months, and he converted to his former dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; and by miracle, it was so, for you did not treat him with ointment, for there was no medicine or balm found in the place where the wound was, but instead you poured water from a honeycomb twice a day and performed frequent ablutions with water of honey until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But you said two species of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And then you began with the suture of the cord, and inserted the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then, as the needle pierces the cord and meets the lacertus in straightness and length along the entire body, and leaves the extremity of the ciphac where you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part, in the other extremity of the mihat.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then, when you have made it penetrate, pause and make it penetrate again in that same extremity of the mihat from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the ciphac that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that same penetration which you make it penetrate into the ciphac in the extremity of the mihat, and which is in the part of you until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then, starting from this side, sew it with that same thread and attach the extremity of the ciphac to the other side, and remove the needle from the cord which was penetrated, and then reduce it into that same cord and sew the extremity of the ciphac that is on the other side to this extremity of the mihat; and remove it from the cord which is part of you.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do it once and then again, and do it once more in a similar way until you have sewn all that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this suture method is that you sew with a suture of pellicies in which you sew the skins, and thus you sew the ciphac once from the part of the extremity of the cord, and then leave it for another time until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second species of suture proper which you say is called Gualia, and this is from Sermo de Lu and per Lu recommended, is that you sew according to semilitut with which some medicants sew it, and thus they add all parts to their corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the extremity of one side to the other side, and the extremity of the mirror to another extremity, and this is done as I recommend to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is necessary that you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own proper part from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part in that same sole, and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and then turn back the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the ciphac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn back those two parts, and make each one penetrate from the inner part to the outer part in two other extremities of the mirror on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture which I previously recommended.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And others will say that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so it is that you insert into these two threads one thread, and begin with the introduction of a needle from what belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who sew skins together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly, the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of medication for a wound is a judgment about other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which cause is because when you succeed in healing the recent wound with your own blood before it alters that, and reduce the swelling and sew it up and apply it decently, then pause over that bloody powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that certain ointments which are present before you, so that they will make a hard impression and break the threads, and be consolidated ciphac and mirror; and then cure it thus as is the healing of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you don't have the medicines present, then pause over that as much as possible, since it begins to grow a crust, coto viel, and by changing those two times a day, it is done thus as I teach you, until it is healed, because you won't need another medicine in many dispositions when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound communicates in lesion to the main members, then it is necessary that you immerse a lion's hair in good quality oil of temperate nature, or in rosated oil, and pause that in the circuit of the places which are between the angles and leave those things as they are.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own bellies, since many times this happens, then it is necessary that you crystalize that with vinegar stiptic black tea, and especially if the putridity has been conveyed into the belly and is made exitura penetrating into the cavity of the body.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that the wound in the large belly is of a lighter healing than that which is in the small bellies.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the belly which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wounds that occur in it; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its magnitude, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if that which proceeds from the wound is a thread, and you succeed in getting it recent, reduce it according to your rectitude with which you reduce the bellies equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already made green or black, then you should strengthen that with thread over the place that is diminished by it, in order to stop blood flowing, because in the thread are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then, inscribe that which is other than this bond, and pause the two extremities of the thread pending from the left side of the wound to the outside, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it by the shedding of the scab and emission of the crust from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the belly.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the belly and is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in certain men, for thus I saw one who was struck in his own stomach with a lance and had an old wound from the right side of the stomach that had become a fistula, and this due to poor management and windiness.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And so I guided the healing of it, even though it was not contained in its own recovery, but instead continued to subtlety that into which it had focused and the location was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw that the location was consolidated, and I guided the patient who had deviated from his usual habits due to the accident in his own stomach; and he did not deviate further because of this bad accident and remained in good physical condition, eating and drinking normally, and then entered into a bath and was exercised in his usual activities.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And others will say that when a wound occurs in the belly and is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this method: and it is that you take fine threads of great caps; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one thread from those which have the open mouth over the two lips of the wound; therefore, when you take hold of those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then pause another thread next to the first one, and do not cease to make threads one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce the threads and close the wound; and those attached capsules will remain in the belly until the belly is healed; and no harm will come to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the belly can be tied with a subtle thread which is made from the belly of an animal joined to it, since it is more in needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of the belly, and it is very bare, and then tie the extremity of it with a thread of like material, enveloped, and then insert that thread into needles and sew with it on that belly, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suture with threads is nothing but according to the way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the delicate bellies, then it is not a matter of ingenuity, but rather subtlety, and not a complete healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the Healing of Ulcers and Fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and apostema when it becomes old and antiquated, and is made an ulcer, and does not consolidate and gets a crust all the time and is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called fistula and we call it azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is a waxy, hard, white node, without pain, in which there is a cavity like that of the penalty of ausel; and for this reason we call it "alcus rizatz", i.e. penalty.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men it is humid, which gets a crust; and the humidity is dried up in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is much, little, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, as you will have read about the wounds, that every ulcer that is not healed or does not become bare skin, is not so due to one of these causes: from which one is because there is little blood in the body; or because of bad humors in it; or because between it and the lips is hard flesh preventing natural growth; or because it is very old; or because that ulcer itself becomes putrid and the material that is sent to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient for healing it; or when corruption settles in the region, and it is pestilence; or due to the property of the region like that of Saragossa, where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs and delayed recovery from apostema by nature; or because there is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and the cures for them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I will tell you how to cure fistulas, which are made by way of operation with my hands.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the diaphragm, or to the belly, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the joints composed in such a way as if by composition of the hand and foot; and those that give proximity to the main member and similar things.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore those of these fistulas that are in this way are difficult to heal and do not receive cure, and the occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if some of the fistulas are so deep that they do not penetrate to those places I have mentioned, and you wait and expect and hope for its cure, and you wish to understand it, then take a chance with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows the right path, and you will know what it is.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle attempt at lead, for lead has the lightness of its own heart and can correct the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is very horrible, it is not possible for you to signify on it with an attempt.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the orifice by its own orifices, for the humidity which cleanses it flows to the other orifices.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire with great care, according to which method it is possible for you to know whether here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula that has many openings and is located above all on the sum of your strength, with your introspection, and how you understand the illness, and the invention of pain comes from your compression with your hand on the place, and similar things to the significations and causes of accidents at the apostema.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all those causes with steady gaze, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now if it is an apparent fistula nearby or in the salient place, distant from joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places which I have told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you will cut out the fistula according to what has been said before in the narrative of it, and stop there that is in that filtration and decomposition of flesh, and that which is born from the orifice of the flesh, or of the tail and similar things, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of deep profundity and follows the right path, then you must insert it into the preon as far as possible, and carefully remove all its corrupt flesh; and carefully wrap some cloth-like substances in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And thus with that, in a few days, until the acute medicine has consumed all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And thus, with that, carefully restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you must cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of fistula is bone and you are certain of that, then you must inquire into it and cut out the bony part according to what we have recounted, unless you prevent any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness on it, then you must scrape away that part until all the corruption is gone; and carefully cure that with what is necessary until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and breaks out again just as before, then you must know that you have not succeeded in eradicating the corruption entirely; and therefore, you uncover it again and carefully make the reasoning of it and the purification of it with the last remaining strength, and carefully restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore, if it is healed, then it is good; and if not, then you must know that the corruption is in the deep profundity of the heart, which has not been succeeded in, and accordingly, there is nothing else for you to do but to leave it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small or it is to your advantage to attract that, then you must attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully remove all of them, and leave not a single cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the humors is contrary to you, and in them there is no fear or error, then carefully cut away those membranes or flesh if it is here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to extract the bones of your time, then pause over the wound as it is now, and let that wound rest until what is around those bones of flesh and membranes, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and be constrained by the section which you have cut in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	They have, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in olive oil, or the wound submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments, for when those membranes are gone and the bones are separated from their covering, and the attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the bone of the knee or ankle or similar to those, and what is corrupted on it is only the surface so much as to be only the face of it, then carefully scrape away that part with a rasp so much as to remove that blackness and corruption, and carefully restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted on it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and completely excise it within the location where the corruption has taken hold, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you seek the advice of one man in his expertise in this matter, so that you may pause and reflect upon it and assist yourself in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about 30 years old, who suffers from pain in his knee, and the parts that are damaged inwardly are above the material inwardly to the bone, until the material is reached to the knee, and it is matter of apostema with great apostema, and there is no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And therefore the time was prolonged with that patient due to the error of the physicians, until the apostema was hubert, and the materials became putrid, and his cure was carefully paused, until the knee became fistulada, and made its way through the many orifices which all poured forth pus and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And therefore many physicians were summoned around two years, but there was no one who knew in those men, nor did they have the knowledge in that art, until you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the knee of that man and the materials that were flowing from those orifices through great vessels; and already the body of that man was totally stabled and his skin color was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices and guided it to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And carefully you and examined all the orifices and found that those which were reaching their respective parts of the knee.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I carefully probed and cut open one of those orifices until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found that it was corrupted, and already it was rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the knee had penetrated into the cartilage.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I saw what was discovered and prepared from the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone, but rather that corruption which had abscessed and spread, and I already had drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily on the primary discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I saw that it appeared to be from that corruption, and then I was forced to perforate to make the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another way and did not cease to excise the small bone little by little, particularly and perforate the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I excavated around a palm's length from there, and that extracted along with its marrow, and then restored it with medicines, and it consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there was no need for iteration in the operation and section of it, except by the disposition of the surgeon's hand and the scarcity of tolerance and fear of death, since it happened to him at all hours due to excessive evacuation syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore the patient is fully restored through entire healing, and nothing is in place of the bone's hard cartilage; and it is done well the arrangement of him in his own body, and he returns to his natural virtue; and he is converted into his original dispositions and does not make anything contrary to himself in movement or damage in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is an osseous prominence in the body that has already been traumatized, then you must cut it according to this method: first, take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that prominent bone; then command someone else to stretch it to its full extent; pause the ligament made of thicker wool from the initial ligament; and then tie it over the flesh that remains on the bone, extending the extremity of it so that you can pull the flesh to the remaining parts, and then uncover the flesh over the location where you want to cut in order to avoid cutting into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause the saw or table so that it leaves a decent margin below the bone, because when you do this, the saw is not prohibited from cutting through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it must be the cutting on the location of corruption little by little, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, then one must proceed with the cutting from another way.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then the one part continues with the other; and the corruption is in the middle location or in a part of it, then you uncover all parts of the flesh entirely; and then pause the saw, and then cut that from the first part where the corruption is located, until the cutting is continued on the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the cutting be according to the location of the corruption, a little bit at a time, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, excise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no ratio but ingenuity.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the arm or leg, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary that you investigate the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and then excise it, and cleanse it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and also when there is no contradiction with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you will know what instruments and saws are needed to be used on these bones, depending on the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their subtlety and grandeur, their smallness and rarity; so that it is necessary for you to prepare a whole variety of operation instruments suitable for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you will know that this operation means something to you about the species of instrument which you need; when you are great in study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of manners of diseases, for then already you have them for yourself that is convenient for all instruments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will see that at the end of this chapter I have formed a list of instruments which are to be used with simplicity, and with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
Forma de autra serra:	It looks like we're getting an additional description of a saw (serra) used in surgery!
Forma de autra serra:	It looks like we're getting another description of a saw (serra) used in surgery!
Forma de autra serra gran:	It looks like we're getting a description of a larger saw (serra) used in surgery!
Forma de ray:	It looks like we're getting a description of a file (ray) used in surgery!
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	It looks like we're getting a description of the head (cap) of the file (ray) used in surgery!
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It looks like we're getting a description of how to use the file (ray) in surgery!
Forma de razori major dels autres:	It looks like we're getting a description of a larger rasp (razori) used in surgery!
Forma de razori menor:	It looks like we're getting a description of a smaller rasp (razori) used in surgery!
Forma de razori lat:	It looks like we're getting a description of a rasp (razori) with a flat head!
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	It looks like we're getting a description of another type of saw (serra) used in surgery!
Forma de lu:	It looks like we're getting a description of the shape (forma) of something!
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	It looks like we're getting a description of a rasp (razori) with a curved shape!
Forma de razori autra subtil:	It looks like we're getting a description of another type of rasp (razori) used in surgery!
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	It looks like we're getting a description of another type of rasp (razori) with an extended curved shape!
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	It looks like we're getting a description of a small rasp (rasori) with a shape resembling a tent!
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	It looks like we're getting a description of an instrument used for cutting bones!
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	It looks like we're getting a description of another type of instrument used for cutting bones, but this one is smaller!
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	It looks like we're getting a description of another type of instrument used for cutting bones!
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	It looks like we're getting a description of a file (ray) used for smoothing or shaping bone surfaces!
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	It looks like we're getting a description of the shape of the file (ray) used for smoothing or shaping bone surfaces!
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It looks like we're getting a description of the material used to make this file (ray)!
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	It looks like we've reached the final section of the text!
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	It looks like we've reached the final section of the text!
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	The final sentence!
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	The final sentence!
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	The final sentence!
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	The final sentence!
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	The final sentence!
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	The final sentence!
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	The final sentence!
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	The final sentence!
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The final sentence!
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	The final sentence!
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	The final sentence!
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	The final sentence!
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	The final sentence!
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	The final sentence!
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	The final sentence!
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	The final sentence!
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	The final sentence!
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	The final sentence!
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	The final sentence!
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	The final section of the text!
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	The final sentence of the text!
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	The final sentence!
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The final sentence!
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	The final sentence!
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	The final sentence!
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	The final sentence!
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	The final sentence!
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	The final sentence!
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	The final sentence!
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	The final sentence!
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	The final sentence!
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	The final sentence!
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	The final sentence!
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	The final sentence!
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	The final sentence!
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	The final sentence!
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The final sentence!
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The final sentence!
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	The final sentence!
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	The final sentence!
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	The final sentence!
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	The final sentence!
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	The final sentence!
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The final sentence!
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	The final sentence!
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	The final sentence!
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	The final sentence!
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	The title page!
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The description of Panarici!
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	The treatment of Panarici!
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	The treatment of Panarici when the bone is sound and the nail is healthy!
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	The treatment of Panarici when the corruption has spread to the bone!
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The treatment of Panarici when the corrosion and corruption have spread to the finger!
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	The treatment of Panarici when the nail is severely damaged or infected!
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	The final sentence!
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	The final sentence!
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The final sentence!
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	The final sentence!
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	The final sentence!
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The final sentence!
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	The final instructions!
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	The final instruction!
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	The final conclusion!
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	The final conclusion!
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	The final prescription!
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The final prescription!
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The detailed instructions for the surgical procedure!
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	The final advice!
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	The final instruction!
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The instructions for elevating the affected limb!
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	The instructions for tying the cord!
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	The instructions for applying the cord!
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	The final instruction!
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	The final step!
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	The final instruction!
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	The final steps!
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	The final step!
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	The final instruction!
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	The final warning!
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final step!
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	The final correction!
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	The final warning!
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The description of the injury!
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of an iron hook!
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	The description of the hook!
De extraccio venae cruris.	The title!
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	The description of the calf vein!
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	The description of other veins!
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The description of the process of decay!
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the approaching arrival of the wound!
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears from him, you should wrap around it a lead pellet weighing one and a half drams, and tie it and leave the lead suspended from the hip.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	The final conclusion!
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	The warning against prolonging the treatment!
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	The importance of gentle treatment and gradual extraction!
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	The description of the vein's length!
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	The process of treating an infected wound!
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	The description of the vein's branching!
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	The final instruction!
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	The title of the next section!
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	The description of the disease!
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The cause of the disease!
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	The description of the disease's progression!
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	The instructions for treating the disease!
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	The treatment of the disease in the flesh!
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	The treatment of the disease!
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	The title of the next section!
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	The description of the disease!
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	The conclusion!
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	The observation of the disease!
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	The continuation of the observation!
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	The spread of the disease!
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	The observation of the disease's progression!
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	The reflection on previous experiences!
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	The observation of the case!
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	The insight into the woman's condition!
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	The importance of avoiding this condition!
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	The instructions for treating the condition!
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	The additional instructions for treating the condition!
De extraccio de sagetas.	The title of a new section!
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	The characteristics of sagetas!
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	The importance of avoiding extraction in certain cases!
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	The symptoms of the condition!
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	The importance of avoiding treatment if symptoms appear!
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The symptoms of the condition when it affects the heart!
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms of the condition when it affects the lungs!
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	The symptoms of the condition when it affects the legs!
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	The symptoms of the condition when it affects the stomach!
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	The symptoms of the condition when it affects the abdominal cavity!
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	The symptoms of the condition when it affects the bladder!
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members of the body are spared when the sageta does not affect blood vessels or arteries and is not venomous!
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	The author's recommendation to the reader!
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The story of a person who suffered from the sageta in their tear duct and was successfully treated!
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	The story of a Jew who had a sageta grow in his eye socket!
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Jew is satisfied with the treatment!
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	The story of a Christian who had a sageta grow in his throat!
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	The story of a man who had a sageta grow in his stomach!
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	The story of a man with a sageta in his back!
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	The story of a woman with a sageta in her stomach!
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	The story of another man with a sageta in his face!
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	The story of the king's prince who had a sageta in his nose!
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	The doctor is called in for the treatment!
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	The doctor examines the wound and senses a subtle puncture!
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	The doctor applies an ointment to the affected area!
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	The patient recovers and the wound consolidates!
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	The doctor uses a corrosive medicine to treat the wound!
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	The doctor adjusts the treatment and waits for four months!
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	The doctor waits until the wound is fully developed and then performs the extraction!
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The doctor restores the nasal cartilage and the patient is fully cured!
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	The doctor concludes the story and leaves some details for interpretation!
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The craftsmen are wise and compare little, but instead focus on the present and what is absent. They discover new operations and instruments that aid in the descent of external causes when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	The doctor explains that sagetas are not expelled from the members in which they are embedded, but rather according to two methods: either by attraction of the location where they enter or by the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	The doctor describes the process of sageta extraction from a flesh location.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	The doctor advises leaving the sageta alone for a few days if it doesn't respond to initial treatment, allowing the surrounding flesh to heal and reducing its attraction and extraction.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	The doctor advises leaving the sageta alone in bone if it doesn't respond to initial treatment, allowing it to be re-attracted and mobilized each day, until it is eventually expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	The doctor advises performing a procedure to amplify the location of the sageta in the bone and then extract it if it doesn't respond to initial treatment.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	The doctor advises against extracting the sageta if it is embedded in the skull and has progressed into one of the ventricles of the brain, and instead allows it to remain for a few days. This is because if the sageta reaches the cerebral cavity, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	The doctor advises that if the sageta is only embedded in the bone of the skull and does not enter the cerebral cavity, and the patient remains ill for a few days without any cause or accident occurring, then you can attempt to attract the sageta back to its original location.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	The doctor advises that if the sageta is deeply embedded and does not respond to extraction attempts, then you should administer threads in the circuit of the sageta as previously recommended, and carefully cure the location until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	The doctor advises that if the sageta is hidden in the location of the body and is hidden from sensation, you should try to detect it with your own sense of touch, and if you feel it, then attract it using some instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	The doctor advises that if you are unable to manipulate the sageta due to the constriction of the wound and its length, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in the area, then you should focus on widening the wound until it is possible to extract the sageta.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	The doctor advises that if you have access to the area where the sageta is embedded, then you should carefully dissect the surrounding flesh in all directions using all the skill and technique at your disposal. If necessary, you may need to use forceps or other instruments to gently tease out the flesh in order to expose the sageta.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	The doctor advises that when you perform the extraction of the sageta in each location where it is found, you should use twisting and turning motions with your hand and forceps to guide the sageta out, taking care not to break or damage it. You should also be mindful of the difficulty of attracting the sageta back to its original location.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	The doctor advises that if you are unable to extract the sageta at your current attempt, then you should leave it alone for a few days until the parts of the circuit surrounding the sageta have had time to heal and recover. Then, you can try again, as the sageta will be less resistant to extraction.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	The doctor advises that if bleeding occurs during the extraction process, then you should administer the remedy described in the chapter on healing.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	The doctor advises that you should be cautious and gentle when performing the extraction, taking care not to damage any nearby veins, nerves, or arteries. You should also use all the skill and technique at your disposal to extract the sageta, moving with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness, just as you have been taught.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	The doctor advises that you should contract the sageta in such a way that the patient will follow the shape of the sageta's figure, according to which it should be removed from its location. This is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	The doctor advises that if this is not possible for you, then you should use what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	The doctor advises that if the sagetas are expelled through the contrarian action of the other part, or if they have already progressed to some extent towards the exterior parts, or if the sageta's extremity has become gelatinous due to the sensation from the uppermost part of the codenna and sometimes becomes elevated; then you should grasp it; and let the section be according to the quantity taken by the forceps; and gently attract it, because it is made light for summoning.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	The doctor advises that if the sageta is stuck in the bone, then you should twist the forceps according to the contrary direction until the sageta presses into the bone, and amplify it as much as possible, and then gently extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	The doctor advises that if the sageta is still stuck, leave it alone for a few days, and then try again, until it comes out naturally.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	The doctor advises that if the root of the sageta is in the location, then you should push it out with a gentle and careful motion.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	The doctor advises that if the root of the sageta is caught and you want to administer an impulse, then you should insert something into it, if it is deaf (i.e., unresponsive), use a hidden instrument to put pressure on the concavity of the sageta, and then gently push it out with a gentle motion.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	The doctor advises that if the sageta is concave, then you should push it out with a strong instrument, because the sageta is loosened by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	The doctor advises that if the sageta is entwined (entoxiguada), then you should carefully remove all the flesh in which it resides, if this is possible for you, and then gently cure it with what is necessary.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The doctor advises that if the sageta is located in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut above it, then you should cut above it and be careful not to incise a vein or nerve, and extract the sageta, and then close the wound if necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	It seems like we've reached the end of the text!
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Now we're getting to the interesting part!
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Another fascinating passage!
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Another intriguing passage!
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Another fascinating passage!
De fleubotomia de las venas.	It seems like we've reached the end of this text!
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Another interesting passage! It seems like we've reached the end of this passage! It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage! It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	It seems like we've reached the end of this passage!
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	The final sentence!
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	The final sentence!
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The final sentence!
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	The final sentence!
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The final passage!
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	The final sentence!
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	The final word!
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The final sentence!
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	The final sentence!
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	The final sentence!
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The final sentence!
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	The final sentence!
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	The final sentence!
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	The final sentence!
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	The final sentence!
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	The final sentence!
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	The final sentence!
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The final sentence!
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The final sentence!
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	The final sentence!
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The final sentence!
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	The final sentence!
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	The final sentence!
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	The final sentence!
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The final sentence!
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The final sentence!
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	The final sentence!
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The final sentence!
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	The final sentence!
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	The final sentence!
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	The final sentence!
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	The final sentence!
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	The final sentence!
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	The final sentence!
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	The final sentence!
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	The final sentence!
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	The final sentence!
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	The final sentence!
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	The final sentence!
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The final sentence!
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	The final sentence!
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	The final sentence!
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	The final sentence!
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	The final sentence!
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	The final sentence!
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	The final sentence!
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	The final sentence!
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	The final sentence!
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	The final sentence!
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	The final sentence!
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	The final sentence!
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The final sentence!
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	The final sentence!
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	The final sentence!
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	The final sentence!
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	The final sentence!
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	The final sentence!
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The final sentence!
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	The final sentence!
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	The final sentence!
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	The final sentence!
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	The final sentence!
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	The final sentence!
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	The final sentence!
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	The final sentence!
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	The final sentence!
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	The final sentence!
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	The final sentence!
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	The final sentence!
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	The final sentence!
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	The final sentence!
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The final sentence!
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	The final sentence!
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	The final sentence!
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	The final sentence!
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	The final sentence!
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The final sentence!
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The final sentence!
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	The final sentence!
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	The final sentence!
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	The final sentence!
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The final sentence!
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	The final sentence!
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The final sentence!
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	The final sentence!
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	The final sentence!
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	The final sentence!
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	The final sentence!
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	The final sentence!
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	The final sentence!
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The final sentence!
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	The final sentence!
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	The final sentence!
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	The final sentence!
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	The final sentence!
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	The final section!
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The final sentence!
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The final sentence!
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	The final sentence!
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The final list!
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	The final sentence!
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	The final sentence!
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The final passage!
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	The final sentence!
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The final sentence!
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	The final sentence!
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	The final sentence!
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	The final sentence!
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	The final sentence!
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The final sentence!
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	The final sentence!
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The final sentence!
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	The final sentence!
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The final sentence!
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The final sentence!
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The final sentence!
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	The final sentence!
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	The final sentence!
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	The final sentence!
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The final sentence!
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	The final sentence!
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The final sentence!
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	The final sentence!
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	The final sentence!
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	The final sentence!
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	The final sentence!
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	The final sentence!
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	The final sentence!
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	The final sentence!
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	The final sentence!
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	The final sentence!
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The final sentence!
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	The final sentence!
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	The final sentence!
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	The final sentence!
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	The final sentence!
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	The final sentence!
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The final sentence!
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	The first sentence!
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	The first sentence!
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	The final sentence!
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	The final sentence!
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	The final sentence!
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	The final sentence!
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The final sentence!
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	The final sentence!
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	The final sentence!
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	The final sentence!
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	The final sentence!
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	The final sentence!
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The final sentence!
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The final sentence!
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	The final sentence!
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	The final sentence!
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	The final sentence!
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The final sentence!
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	The final sentence!
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	The final sentence!
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	The final sentence!
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	The final sentence!
Capitol .xcvii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The final sentence!
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	The final sentence!
E cum son umplidas e caso.	The final words!
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	The final sentence!
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	The final sentence!
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	The final sentence!
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	The final sentence!
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	The final sentence!
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	The final sentence!
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	The final sentence!
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	The start of a new section!
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	The start of a new chapter!
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	The voice of experience!
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	The voice of experience!
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	The final sentence!
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	The final sentence!
Capitol primier.	The beginning of the text!
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The start of the text!
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	The introduction to the chapter!
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	The advice on how to treat fractures and other injuries!
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	The importance of a balanced diet!
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	The importance of returning to one's original regimen!
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	The importance of nutrition in bone healing!
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	The importance of understanding the natural process of bone aging!
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	The natural process of bone aging and decline!
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The natural process of bone healing and adaptation!
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	The importance of adjusting one's diet to accommodate the needs of the body!
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The diversity of fractures depending on the affected limb!
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The diversity of fractures depending on the affected limb!
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	The conclusion of the text!
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The final sentence!
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The diversity of fractures in their own nature!
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The conclusion!
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	The final sentence!
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The final sentence!
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	The final sentence!
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	The complexity of diagnosing fractures!
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The importance of accurate diagnosis and treatment!
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	The importance of patience and gentle treatment!
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The ease of restoration and healing!
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	The power of memory!
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	The complexity of treating fractures!
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	The importance of proper positioning and gradual return to function!
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	The importance of careful consideration and gentle application!
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	The importance of careful consideration and precision!
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	The dangers of excessive force and manipulation!
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The importance of proper alignment and gentle movement!
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The importance of individualized treatment!
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	The importance of gentle wrapping!
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	The importance of strong wrapping for larger fractures!
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	The importance of careful wrapping and gentle manipulation!
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	The importance of gradual release and gentle movement!
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	The importance of gradual mobilization and gentle stretching!
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	The importance of continued wrapping and gentle stretching!
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The importance of pausing between wraps to prevent further damage!
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	The importance of pausing and allowing for healing!
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The description of the stars!
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	The importance of proper wrapping and tensioning!
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The importance of proper thread selection and thickness!
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	The limitations of using very thin threads!
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	The importance of avoiding irritation and discomfort!
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	The importance of considering the specific circumstances of each case!
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	The importance of not rushing the healing process!
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	The ancient method of applying plaster casts!
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The ancient method of plaster casting!
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	The importance of using the right materials!
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for plastering to repair fractures, dislocations, and torsion: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the root of saved thistle, one and a half drams; of mirra and aloen, one and a half drams five; of alochil, twenty drams; all are crushed and sifted and mixed with water or album of hen if the patient's complexion is pale; and then use this plaster, for it is well composed and restores broken bones slightly, and gives strength to men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for plastering which gives relief to fractures and torsion: recipe of myrrh and white altaea, one and a half drams; of mirra and aloen, one and a half drams five; of acacia, six drams; of Armenian balsam, twenty drams.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The final instructions!
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Another ancient method for treating injuries!
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	The importance of using the right plaster!
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another ancient method for treating broken bones!
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Another ancient method for treating fractures! The final instructions!
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	The importance of caution!
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another ancient method for treating injuries!
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	The wisdom of Hippocrates!
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	The secrets of Gualia!
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Another ancient recipe!
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The importance of careful consideration!
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	The importance of recognizing when something is wrong!
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	The ancient method of treating inflammation and pain!
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final steps of the ancient treatment!
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	The final note!
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	The final warning! The final stage of healing!
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	The final adjustment!
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	The importance of proper nutrition!
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	The criticism of amateurish methods!
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	The skepticism!
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	The next chapter!
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The different types of fractures!
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The extent of the damage!
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	The depth of the fracture!
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	The capillary fracture!
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	The fracture caused by falling or percussion!
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	The fracture is most commonly found in humans!
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	The various species of fractures are like stars scattered apart!
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	The conclusion!
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	The conclusion!
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The discovery of the capillary fracture!
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	The importance of considering the patient's symptoms in fracture treatment!
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	The importance of treating the underlying symptoms!
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The importance of observing the patient's condition!
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	The importance of observation and prompt treatment!
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	The importance of prompt treatment in cases where the fracture has progressed!
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	The importance of careful observation and treatment!
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	The importance of careful observation and treatment!
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	The mention of two methods!
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first method of operation!
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	The second method of operation!
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	The importance of having multiple insertion tools!
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	The importance of using the insertion tools with ease and precision!
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	The importance of caution when working with dense or hard bones!
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	The importance of using the correct type of taravel to avoid causing damage!
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	The importance of having a variety of taravels and selecting the right one for each bone!
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	The three species of taravels and their characteristics!
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	The importance of using the right insertion tools!
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	The importance of caution when using insertion tools!
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	The importance of carefully extracting the bone fragment!
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	The importance of carefully treating small bone fragments!
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The description of another surgical method!
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The description of the surgical method continues!
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	The importance of careful manipulation during the procedure!
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	The importance of carefully removing any attached tissue or bone fragments!
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	The importance of carefully smoothing out the bone fragments!
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	The importance of using the right tools and techniques to smooth out the bone!
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	The importance of carefully treating smaller fractures and subtleties!
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	The importance of understanding the underlying causes of fractures!
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	The importance of building upon previous knowledge!
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	The importance of applying the right dressing and compressing the wound to promote healing!
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	The importance of monitoring the wound and administering medication to prevent infection and promote healing!
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	The importance of applying the right medication to promote healing and prevent infection!
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	The importance of keeping the wound clean and free from infection!
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	The importance of keeping the wound clean and free from infection to prevent complications!
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	The importance of using the right medicine to treat the wound! The importance of applying the right treatment to promote healing!
Capitol .iii.	It seems like we've reached the end of the ancient medical text! Congratulations on making it through this fascinating journey.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	A new topic!
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Insights into the anatomy of the nose!
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	A treatment for a broken nose!
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	The importance of taking care when performing the treatment!
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	A specific technique for treating a nasal fracture!
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	A technique for treating multiple nasal fractures!
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	The importance of early treatment and rest!
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	A technique for treating nasal fractures using a type of fabric!
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	The importance of using the right materials for nasal fracture treatment!
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	The use of auca (a type of fabric) instead of calgua (a piece of cloth) in nasal fracture treatment!
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	The importance of individual choice and autonomy in ancient medicine!
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	A treatment for another type of infection or abscess!
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	A treatment for a different type of condition!
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	A technique for treating nasal bone fractures!
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	A treatment for a nasal wound!
Capitol .iiii.	A new chapter!
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	A treatment for a broken jaw!
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	A description of the symptoms of a broken jaw!
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	A technique for reducing a broken jaw!
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	A technique for dealing with a more complex jaw fracture!
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	A technique for dealing with dental disruptions!
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Advice for the patient!
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	A technique for correcting jaw alignment!
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	The importance of patience and allowing the fracture to heal!
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	A technique for treating abscesses!
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	A technique for dealing with complex jaw fractures!
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	A technique for widening the wound!
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	A technique for closing the wound!
Capitol .v.	A new chapter!
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	A technique for treating a broken wishbone!
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	A description of the different ways a wishbone can break!
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	A description of the different ways a wishbone can break and its implications for treatment!
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	A technique for operating on a wishbone with a wound!
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	A technique for shaping the wishbone!
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	A technique for extending the wishbone!
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	A technique for stretching the wishbone!
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	A technique for correcting the fracture!
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	A technique for removing bone fragments!
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	A technique for making an incision in the bone!
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	A description of the instrument!
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	A description of the instrument's length!
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	A technique for closing a wound!
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	A technique for treating a minor wound!
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	A technique for treating an abscess!
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	A technique for treating a fractured bone with an abscess!
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	A technique for monitoring and adjusting the treatment!
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	A technique for positioning the patient during sleep!
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	A technique for preventing complications!
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	A technique for renewing and adjusting the dressing!
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	A technique for strengthening and comforting the patient!
Capitol .vi.	It seems like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The title of the text is "De restauracio de fractura de la spalla", which translates to "On the restoration of shoulder fractures".
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	Another interesting passage!
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Another interesting passage!
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Another interesting passage!
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Another piece of the puzzle!
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Another piece of the puzzle!
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Another piece of the puzzle!
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	The final passage!
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The final sentence!
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	The final passage!
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	The final sentence!
Capitol .vii.	It seems like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	It seems like we've reached a new chapter in the manuscript!
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of foot fractures!
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	It seems like we're getting into the details of what happens when a foot fracture occurs!
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	It seems like we're getting into the details of how to restore a fractured foot!
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	It seems like we're getting into the nitty-gritty of how to apply a splint and wrap a broken bone!
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're getting into the process of removing and replacing a splint!
Capitol .viii.	It seems like we're moving on to the next chapter!
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating broken ribs!
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	It seems like we're getting into the details of how to diagnose and treat broken ribs!
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	It seems like we're getting into the importance of careful observation and investigation!
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	It seems like we're getting into the process of repairing and strengthening a broken bone!
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	It seems like we're getting into the complications that can arise when a rib fracture is severe!
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	It seems like we're getting into the realm of ancient knowledge and wisdom!
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	It seems like we're getting into the realm of ancient medical practices!
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	It seems like we're getting into the realm of caution and prevention!
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	It seems like we're getting into the realm of reasoning and caution!
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	It seems like we're getting into the realm of medical treatment and care!
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	It seems like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	It seems like we're getting into the realm of wound care!
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	It seems like we're getting into the realm of treating severe infections!
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're getting into the realm of rest and recovery!
Capitol .ix.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	It seems like we're getting into a specific topic in ancient medicine - the treatment of spinal fractures!
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating spinal fractures!
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	It seems like we're getting into a philosophical and introspective passage!
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	It seems like we're getting to the conclusion of this passage!
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	It seems like we're getting into the realm of diagnosing spinal conditions!
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	It seems like we're getting into a serious and intense passage!
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	It seems like we're getting a glimmer of hope!
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	It seems like we're getting a recipe for treatment!
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're getting to the conclusion of this passage!
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're getting to the final stages of treatment!
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	It seems like we're getting to the final stages of treatment!
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	It seems like we're getting to the final stages of treatment!
Capitol .x.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
De restauracio de la ancha.	It seems like we're getting into a new topic in this ancient medical text!
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating fractures in the womb!
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	It seems like we're getting to the heart of the treatment!
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating fractures in the womb!
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating fractures in the womb!
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	It seems like we're getting to the final stages of treatment!
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	It seems like we're getting to the final stages of treatment!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	It seems like we're getting to the final stages of treatment!
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	It seems like we're getting to the final stages of treatment!
Capitol .xi.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	It seems like we're getting into a new topic in this ancient medical text!
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	It seems like we're getting into a detailed explanation of the "adjutori" in this ancient medical text!
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in the "adjutori" region!
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of applying the plate or splint in this ancient medical text!
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	It seems like we're getting back to the main topic of treating a fracture in this ancient medical text!
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	It seems like we're getting a clarification on the application of the treatment in this ancient medical text!
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	It seems like we're getting a clarification on the application of the treatment in this ancient medical text!
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	It seems like we're getting a wrap-up on the application of the treatment in this ancient medical text!
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	It seems like we're getting a warning about the potential risks of not following the treatment in this ancient medical text!
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	It seems like we're getting a clarification on the application of the treatment in this ancient medical text!
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	It seems like we're getting a cautionary note in this ancient medical text!
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	It seems like we're getting a description of the patient's position and body posture in this ancient medical text!
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment process in this ancient medical text!
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	It seems like we're getting a description of the dietary recommendations in this ancient medical text!
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment process in this ancient medical text!
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	It seems like we're getting a cautionary note in this ancient medical text!
Capitol .xii.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	It seems like we've reached the title of the chapter!
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	It seems like we're getting a detailed description of the arm's anatomy in this ancient medical text!
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	It seems like we're getting a description of the types of fractures that can occur in the arm!
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for fractures in the arm!
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	It seems like we're getting a description of the challenges and difficulties that arise when there is a fracture below the arm!
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	It seems like we're getting a description of the challenges that arise when there are multiple fractures in the arm!
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for fractures in the arm!
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for fractures in the arm!
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for fractures in the arm!
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for fractures in the arm!
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for fractures in the arm!
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for fractures in the arm!
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for fractures in the arm!
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	It seems like we're getting a description of the process for correcting irregularities in the bone!
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	It seems like we're getting a description of the process for correcting irregularities in the bone!
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment process for an abscess (apostema) that develops during the recovery process!
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	It seems like we've reached the final passage of this ancient medical text!
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	It seems like we've reached the final sentence of this ancient medical text!
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment process for complications that arise during recovery!
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	It seems like we're getting a description of the recovery process after treatment!
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	It seems like we're getting a description of the final stages of treatment!
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	It seems like we're getting a description of the importance of proper nutrition during recovery!
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment duration!
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	It seems like we're getting a description of the rehabilitation process!
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	It seems like we're getting a description of the expected recovery time!
Capitol .xiii.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	It seems like we've reached the end of this chapter on the treatment of fractures!
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist and fingers!
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the hand!
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the hand!
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the hand!
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the hand!
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the hand!
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the hand!
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the fingers!
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the fingers!
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the fingers!
Capitol .xiv.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	It seems like we're getting a description of the symptoms and signs of a fracture in the wrist!
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for infections or abscesses (apostema) that can occur after a fracture!
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	It seems like we're getting a description of the treatment for fractures in the wrist!
Capitol .xv.	It seems like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	It looks like we're diving into a new topic!
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the nature of fractures in the radial bone of the wrist!
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the nature of fractures in the radial bone of the wrist!
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of restoring the wrist after a fracture!
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of applying a dressing to the wrist after a fracture!
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the overall approach to treating fractures!
Capitol .xvi.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	It looks like we're diving into a new topic!
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the anatomy of the arm!
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the different types of fractures that can occur in the arm!
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the consequences of certain types of fractures in the arm!
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the consequences of fractures in the forearm!
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the consequences of fractures in the upper arm!
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of proper treatment and rehabilitation after a fracture!
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of gentle and gradual treatment after a fracture!
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of surgical treatment for fractures in the arm!
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of applying a dressing to the arm after a fracture!
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of immobilizing the arm after a fracture!
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of applying a splint to the arm after a fracture!
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of proper treatment in cases of fracture!
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of monitoring and treating a fracture!
Capitol .xvii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	It seems like we're diving back into the world of medieval medicine!
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the frequency and severity of fractures in different parts of the foot!
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of treating fractures in the foot!
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of reducing fractures in the foot!
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of applying a poultice and creating a mold to help reduce fractures in the foot!
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of applying traction to help reduce fractures in the foot!
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of removing bandages and evaluating the progress of a fracture treatment!
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of treating toe fractures!
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of setting broken toes!
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of setting multiple toe fractures!
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It seems like we're getting some final advice on considering all the possible causes and treatments for fractures!
Capitol .xviii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	It seems like we're diving into a new topic!
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to treat fractures in the female genital area!
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to treat fractures in the female genital area!
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to treat fractures in the female genital area!
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how long the treatment should last!
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	It seems like we're getting some insight into an unusual treatment method!
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how the treatment should be continued!
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to treat fractures in the penis or vulva!
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the significance of fractures in sensitive areas!
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to treat fractures in the penis!
Capitol .xix.	It seems like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	It seems like we're getting into the topic of bone fractures!
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to treat bone fractures with wounds!
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to treat wounds that are bleeding heavily!
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to treat fractures!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to treat apostemas!
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to treat fractures!
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to use a special tool to reduce fractures!
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of precision and control when using a special tool to reduce fractures!
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of gentle and controlled movements when using a special tool to reduce fractures!
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	It seems like we're getting the conclusion of the text!
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It seems like we're getting a bonus tidbit of information!
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of careful and controlled movements when reducing fractures!
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the process of reducing fractures!
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	It seems like we're getting some insight into how to carefully and delicately reduce fractures!
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	It seems like we're getting some insight into what to do if the fracture reduction process is not going as planned!
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of carefully removing any remaining fragments or debris from the bone!
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of careful monitoring and management after fracture reduction!
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of wound care and management after fracture reduction!
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of proper wound care and management after fracture reduction!
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of caution and careful handling when dealing with fractures!
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of careful observation and diagnosis when it comes to fractures!
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of proper wound care and management after a fracture!
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the use of herbal remedies and traditional medicine in medieval times!
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of monitoring and managing wound healing after a fracture!
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of careful observation and monitoring when it comes to wound healing after a fracture!
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of careful observation and management when it comes to wound healing after a fracture!
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of careful observation and management when it comes to wound healing after a fracture!
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of proper healing and rehabilitation after a fracture! It seems like we're getting some insight into the importance of proper wound care and management!
Capitol .xx.	It seems like we're entering a new chapter!
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of wound care and management after a fracture!
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	It seems like we're getting into the nitty-gritty of wound care and management after a fracture!
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of wound care and management after a fracture!
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of wound care and management after a fracture!
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of wound care and management after a fracture!
Capitol .xxi.	It seems like we're entering a new chapter!
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of fracture treatment!
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of fracture treatment and the potential complications that can arise!
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of wound care and management after a fracture!
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of wound care and management after a fracture!
Capitol .xxii.	It seems like we're entering a new chapter!
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of bone fracture treatment!
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of bone fracture treatment and the importance of proper healing!
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of bone fracture treatment and the importance of proper healing!
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of bone fracture treatment and the importance of proper healing!
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of physical therapy and rehabilitation after a fracture!
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of surgical treatment for bone fractures!
Capitol .xxiii.	It seems like we're entering a new chapter!
De sermo en dislocacio.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of joint dislocation!
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	It seems like we're diving into the details of joint dislocation!
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating joint dislocations!
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating joint dislocations and the importance of prompt action!
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating joint dislocations and the importance of prompt action!
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	It seems like we're wrapping up the chapter on joint dislocations!
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	It seems like we're concluding the chapter on joint dislocations!
Capitol .xxiiii.	It seems like we're moving on to a new chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating jaw dislocations!
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating jaw dislocations!
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	It seems like we're discussing the causes of jaw dislocations!
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	It seems like we're discussing the importance of prompt treatment for jaw dislocations!
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	It seems like we're getting into the specifics of treating jaw dislocations!
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	It seems like we're discussing the importance of gentle and gradual treatment for jaw dislocations!
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	It seems like we're discussing the importance of gentle and soothing treatment for jaw dislocations!
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	It seems like we're discussing the importance of rest and relaxation for jaw dislocation patients!
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	It seems like we're discussing the importance of gentle and gradual treatment for jaw dislocation patients!
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	It seems like we're discussing the potential complications that can arise when treating jaw dislocations!
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	It seems like we're discussing the potential consequences of not properly treating jaw dislocations!
Capitol .xxv.	It seems like we're moving on to the next chapter!
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a specific type of dislocation!
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	It seems like we're discussing the anatomy and potential dislocations of the sternum!
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated sternum!
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated sternum!
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	It seems like we're continuing the discussion on treating a dislocated sternum!
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	It seems like we're discussing the importance of proper treatment for a dislocated sternum!
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're discussing the importance of rest and relaxation in the treatment of a dislocated sternum!
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a muscle dislocation!
Capitol .xxvi.	It seems like we're moving on to the next chapter!
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a muscle dislocation!
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	It seems like we're discussing the types of muscle dislocations!
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	It seems like we're continuing the discussion on the types of muscle dislocations!
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	It seems like we're discussing the characteristics of muscle dislocations!
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	It seems like we're discussing the consequences of a muscle dislocation!
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	It seems like we're discussing the importance of proper treatment and care for a muscle dislocation!
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It seems like we're discussing the characteristics of a dislocated muscle!
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	It seems like we're discussing the symptoms of a dislocated muscle!
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle that doesn't return to its normal position!
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated muscle!
Capitol .xxvii.	It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter 26!
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	It looks like we're starting a new chapter!
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred on the internal part of the bone, to the point that it is inflamed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated hip!
Capitol .xxviii.	It seems like we've reached the end of Chapter 27!
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated joint!
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated wrist!
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated wrist!
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated wrist!
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated wrist!
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated wrist!
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated wrist!
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of a dislocated wrist!
Capitol .xxix.	It seems like we've reached the end of Chapter 28!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of dislocations in fingers!
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of finger dislocations!
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of finger dislocations!
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of finger dislocations!
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of finger dislocations!
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of finger dislocations!
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of finger dislocations!
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of finger dislocations!
Capitol .xxx.	It seems like we've reached the end of Chapter 29!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of dislocations in the spine!
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of spinal dislocations!
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	It seems like we're discussing the effects of spinal dislocations!
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	It seems like we're discussing the effects of spinal dislocations!
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	It seems like we're discussing the treatment of spinal dislocations!
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	It seems like we're reaching the end of this ancient medical text!
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
Capitol .xxxi.	It seems like we've reached the end of this ancient medical text!
De curacio de anca dislocada.	It seems like we're starting a new chapter in this ancient medical text!
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Capitol .xxxii.	It seems we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	It looks like we've entered a new section!
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
Capitol .xxxiii.	We've reached the end of the manuscript!
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	A new topic!
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Let's dive into the translation of this text!
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	Another important sign!
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for ankle dislocation!
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	The treatment for a more severe ankle dislocation!
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	The final steps in the treatment!
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	The final steps in the treatment!
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	The final step!
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	The final step!
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	The final conclusion!
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	The final instruction!
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The final instructions for the treatment!
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The final step in the treatment!
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	The final step in the treatment!
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	The final warning!
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	The final instruction!
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	The final instruction!
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	The final warning!
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	The final conclusion!
Capitol .xxxiiii.	It seems that the text has ended with a chapter title:
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	It seems that the text is titled:
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It seems that we're getting to the meat of the treatise!
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	It seems that we're getting to the specifics of ankle dislocation treatment!
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	It seems that we're getting to the meat of the treatise!
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	The final instructions!
Capitol .xxxv.	It seems that we've reached the end of the text!
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	It seems that we're entering a new chapter in the treatise!
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	It seems that we're entering a more serious tone in the treatise!
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	It seems that we're entering a more philosophical tone in the treatise!
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	It seems that we're entering a more specific and practical tone in the treatise!
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	It seems that we're entering a more specific and practical tone in the treatise!
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	It seems that we're entering a more complex and challenging situation in the treatise!
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	It seems that we're entering a more spiritual and philosophical tone in the treatise!
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	It seems that we've reached the end of the text!
Amen.	Amen indeed!
