Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The words of Albucazim begin thus.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, because it follows from its conclusion to its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that you should complete that in you and this treatise, which is a part of surgical operation with my own hands.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the surgical operation with my own hands is almost extinct in our region and in our time, to the point that little remains of its science, and its practice is obscure; and there are hardly any descriptions of it left in the books of the Ancients, which have been corrupted and distorted by those errors and misunderstandings to the point that the intentions of it are sealed and the force of it and the art have been stretched.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you should revitalize that order of this treatise through the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for the purpose of adding the forms of instruments such as cauteries and other tools of the craft, so that it may be added to the declaration and prepared in advance, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why one cannot find a good craftsman with his own hands in our time is because the art of medicine is lengthy, and one's actor must be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy which Galen knew so well that he could recognize the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and the arrangement of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their effusion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore I say with Hippocrates that a name is but a sound, much more in the small work and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said this about him in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable in anatomy as we have taught it will not be spared from falling into error by which men are killed, just as I have seen many of them, since some are formed in this science and take themselves out of that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For you saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who inserted an abscess in the throat of a woman, and cut some arteries of the throat so that great blood flowed out, until the woman died between her own hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who forced the removal of a stone from a man whom he had operated on in his state, and the stone was large, and it came out to him and pulled that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died three days later.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already warned him to remove it, and I saw that because of the largeness of the stone and the disposition of the patient he would surely die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took stipend from a duke in our land for surgery, and endeavored to set a broken leg of a black man on his own; and the doctor prepared himself with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pulleys and stays with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he loosened it according to his own desires, and then he relaxed it, and then he allowed it to become loose for some days and commanded that we loosen the bandage; and thus it happened that the leg and foot became abscessed, and ultimately led to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and subsequently achieved his tranquility and alleviation from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But meanwhile corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and did not cease to spread corruption in the member until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and let it ulcerate just a few days later, so that the great evil spread its malevolence to the lord of the house.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which is because the cancerous humors are pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not need to be driven out with iron throughout, but rather remains in the member which suffers and is entirely hostile.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with my own hands be divided into two parts: one being an operation associated with health, and another being an art in which there is peril in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed in every place of this book where the operation is in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard this and keep that, so that foolish people do not find a way to speak and to despise you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your own arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your own sick people with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God to obtain salvation and glorious success, and keep the terrible diseases at bay from difficult healing, and remain steadfast with your arms from now on that make you afraid, so that your expectation in your faith and in your name does not deceive you: for it is remaining to your glory, and even more in this world and in the next to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen has already said in certain of his writings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Touch not the fallen, lest you fall yourself".
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter, ordered by the head to the feet, in the forms of instruments and ironmongery of cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on suction and perforation, and on cupping glasses, and on wounds, and on the extraction of splinters and similar things, all categorized and ordered by the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of torticollis and similar things; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and by the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauteries with fire and acute medicine, and recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In this begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	You should know the quality of the joints of that cautery and the imperfections of it, and in what condition it is prohibited to use a cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the joint of the cautery and its imperfections is a long and prolix sermon, subtle by science, and secret veiled; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and I will not exceed a little from their sermons, fearing prolivity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery is contrary to the entire universal complexion, which is in matter or its material, except for two complexions which are caudal with respect to their material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the caudal and dry complexion with material it will desiccate; for some say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others say the opposite of it, that cautery is not suitable in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a caudal and dry disease with water that is caustic and dry should be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say that the one who says the opposite of this, that through cautery is made a joint in all caudal and dry diseases that are found in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the sermon of that, that experience has already shown me on several occasions to uncover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not think it necessary to go further on this subject, for it has already been explained and exercised in the chapter on cautery by last exercise, and for understanding the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of diseases in their respective bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other complexions, there is no fear for you, and most of all in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors have agreed on those, and are not discordant on the joint with cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that from the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its goodness, so much is overdone in combining it with medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and does not harm another member adjacent to it except for a small disturbance.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of medicine combined with it reaches that member in which it is distant from, and very easily brings a disease of difficult healing to the sick member and very easily increases.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, due to its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do this except that it is superfluous. And it has already been known to us through experience and the long service of studying art over the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not for the fact that it is read in a more subtle book in this pause to you, a secret veiled in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, with philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be useful in your souls.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that some disagree on the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, for the inconvenience caused by time accidents is submerged in the joint of that which is attracted to the cautery, and most of all if the cautery is for necessary pains or fistulous pains, strong and painful, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared of those who bring evil, which is greater than a small inconvenience entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus it is not known in your souls, or, sons, that this is not esteemed by anyone except the common people and foolish doctors, so that to that disease which is cured by cautery, there is no reduction at all times, and pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think by this, for cautery is nothing but a place in medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humors which are the cause of why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But meanwhile, cautery is superfluous over medicine by the will of its virtue and value of its operation and greatness of its Lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that its disease may return at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of superfluous humors, and that which has been acquired by him through food and similar causes; except that the disease for which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluous humors and moistures, such as cauterization of the tooth for pain and similar cases, it is possible that it will not return there, but rather this will happen in small degrees.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is also the common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a speech deceiver, not according to what I understand in this, for I believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine or by another nearby cause.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to this; and I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine only when we administer the methods of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and nearby at the end of the cause one administers cauterization, and it profits by that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here on, I say that cauterery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand as common and foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make a difference, as it is not absolutely true, for I have already proved and demonstrated that it does not do so except in certain bodies, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, just as they say; but meanwhile when you perform cauterization with fire on gold, it is not declared to you, because it is according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and since it prepares to receive cold; and if you adjust above it ignition, so that the gold melts in the fire, and case some thin sheets are formed, so that the craftsman can see through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore it is necessary to perform cauterization with iron more gently and more precisely, in order to achieve the rightness of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and have arranged those from head to feet, in order that the demanding one may be alleviated of what he wishes for.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On Cauterization of Headache due to Coldness and Moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The First Chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers upon the humidity and coldness over the servile accident of which two causes are, that is, cause of soda and multitude of raumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the partitions of the eyes and ears, and multitude of sleepiness, and toothaches and throataches, and universally all disease that comes through coldness, such as paralysis, sodality, apoplexy, and similar cases in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, I command the patient to be purged with laxative medicine, clarifying the head, for three or four nights, according to what is required by the virtue of the patient and his age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make that place steady between his two eyebrows on a carved bench, and let his hands rest on his knees.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the razor's stroke at the tip of your thumb on the nose between your eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But meanwhile, as you said about the middle place has arrived, mark that place with a tent, and then ignite the olive cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause that on the marked place with a tent, in a manner that it descends, by which my thumb is gradually constricted and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see that already some amount of bone is uncovered from the head, like the quantity of an egg yolk, then lift your hand, and if your hand does not return to the iron, but instead becomes cold, until it is seen by the bone what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place, and let it remain for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause over the wound, covered with a bandage and cloth, and let it remain until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with four-leafed gentian medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the wound remains open, so much the better for getting rid of it, because it is more good and more helpful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that some of them should be cauterized with the cord into the bone, and the cautery should be kept until some part of the specificity of the bone is revealed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it will be scraped away what is adjusted to the bone, and then it will be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery it will reach the last stage, until it presses strongly into the bone, until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little alpha-cattery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place the vapors of the head will evaporate.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I do not see these two species of cautery in all men, except in some individuals according to the way of fear; and leave it alone, as I say, better is with salt when it is so, because the head has been revealed through the solution of continuity there, just as we have testified in other members, and most especially when the patient's head is of a cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cautery is more saved and better, as I say; and from that hole and with that work, there is salvation.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the Cauterization of the Head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head a chronic and long-lasting pain occurs, and this is prolonged in the patient, and they use various remedies such as garters, cochias, capipures, emplausters, guats, cadels, and gualinas, and most especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which relapses and does not profit from any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and if it is not cold and finds little warmth, then that cauterizes another cautery, leaving a little interval.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize it over the horn of one's head with a cautery until the cord is parted.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the cord and let the bone be revealed with the quantity we have recounted, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the back part of the head, at the location called the "vas", which is where the windpipe is situated.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand away from there, and do not reveal the bone, because the patient by this will experience a great and diverse pain unlike all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery should be done in its place, because it is necessary to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput with a more subtle cautery than the one used for the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Fourth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the Cauterization of Nocturnal Migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain is soft in the part of the head, or spreads to the eye, let the head be purged with medicines and let another cure be administered, which I have said in the sections on diseases; and if it does not profit, then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either with acute medicine combined, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cautery with combined medicine is when you take a handful of alum, and dissolve it, and cut off the extremities from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then make an incision in the location of the pain on the temple with a well-sharpened lancet until it is made a small opening leaving the cord, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then stretch over it with a stopper to prevent descent constriction, and leave that for the space of three hours; and then remove the plug and apply the alum, and let the wound be left for two or three days, and then pause over it submerged in cloth until the location makes an opening.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with gentian medicine until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some combined medicines which I have written in the two treatises on combined medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cautery with iron, according to this manner: ignite the fire of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a form of a key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then pause over the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that the arc may not be revealed which is left behind - and rotate the small iron piece by piece with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is revealed by the specificity of the cord is like the majority of it, and elevate your hand for this reason, that the artery may not be revealed which is left behind, lest a flow of blood should come.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak the cloth in saltwater and pause that over the location, and leave it for three days; and then pause the cloth with a bandage, and then cure with gentian medicine until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize the extremity of the scalp according to the cautery, and take care not to cut into the artery in this nocturnal migraine properly non-antique.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the Cauterization of Nocturnal Migraine (Antique).
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure a nocturnal migraine with the method we have described for previous cures, and what we have said in the sections on diseases, and if the cure does not profit, and at times the disease is so great that it does not reach to the point of what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or with fire, then it is necessary to ignite the scalp cauterizer until it is well-alighted, since you signify on the location of the pain with a line of length equal to the majority of the digit, or whatever that may be; and pause your hand for a moment and stretch it out, so that the artery may not be cut into and reach to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone, which is marred by the act of mastication, and that the ligament is not torn and the nerves which are affected by it, and that there is no spasmodic seizure.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is over the custodianship and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in the cutting of it there is fear, and most especially to him who ignores what he does and is not studious or expert; and leave the operation at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find a reminder of the regulation of the accidental bleeding from the artery according to my own method, in this very place of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and you see the patient's body is tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of the artery with two handles, and it is better and more suitable.
Capitol .v.	Fifth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the Cauterization of Earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the section, and if the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one called "puncta", of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then make the puncture carefully and ignite it, and bring it around the entire ear like a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of each example if the pain is in any one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Stretch out your hand with the cautery along the ridge of the ear little by little, so that you can mark the location with intent.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery is applied to all these points on the entire ear, and where it is needed, then carefully cure the locations until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the Cauterization of Turtura (Turbidur).
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turtura which is cured and with cautery is not but the species that comes through phlegm, according to what we have said in the sections on diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the species that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of turtura with jerras and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and your cure does not bring relief, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first on the ridge of the ear, the second a little behind the temple, and the third at the conjunction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery on the opposite side of the ailing part, because only softening occurs in the part that appears to be healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cautery is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and on the temple another one, the length of which is according to the length of the toe, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the cord's specificity is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of scalp, the form of which is before the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however subtle it may be, there is a little bit that you see; and it is necessary to cut away the excessive redundancy by just a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the location with this water, as it is before the process, until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with the water we have said and your medicine does not bring relief and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of one's head; and with the middle part of the head, just as we have said; and in the forehead.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is more posterior; and then be cured with water that proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the Cauterization of Oblivion caused by Phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	And it is necessary to give the patient in the beginning large doses and pills that serve as purgatives.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then remove the head covering from the patient and pause on the forehead of it an ointment described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that for a few days, because that is the manner of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to the order we have said, as has been described.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if it is healed by those means; and if not, then do the three cauteries in the back part of one's head, which are descending from the uppermost part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery the length of the finger, and then cure the cautery with water that has proceeded.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more and the patient is already tolerant, then do the cautery in the middle location; and if you wish even greater addition, then cauterize that over both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And carefully cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped, according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Ninth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the Cauterization of Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	And carefully process in the softening of the head with jerras and water as we have said; and then remove the head covering from the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head, and with a cautery on all the horns of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body's flesh and the patient is very tolerant and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards with one cautery until the cord is consumed from the top to the bottom, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And carefully cure that until it is healed, and this is olive-shaped cautery.
Capitol .x.	Tenth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the Cauterization of Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No, it is not cauterized with epilepsy, but that epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore it is necessary to soften the brain of the patient at the beginning with jerras and with the other cure which we have said in the section, when the disease is great and the patient is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is an infant who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarismes and mastiguation pills that serve as softeners, before this for several days, with the blessing of good foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then remove the head covering from the patient, and then cauterize that with one cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each horn of the head, may it be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries which I say, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be olive-shaped according to what has been previously said.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is an infant, then pause on a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Eleventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the Cauterization of Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and thickened phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him to drink water that softens the brain of it according to what has preceded in the section.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then remove the head covering from the patient, and then make a tortoise shell of decent size made of lead, and place it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be seated comfortably and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a poultice, and it is more worthy of being wrapped in an old sheep's skin.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with tempered heat by measure, which is what it suffered when it was most in need.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle part of the head on the circle, and let it stay there until it is cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient for a whole week, with another regimen of good treatment until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that by making small points according to its nature, but in such a way that you hold your hand with a cautery thus arranged: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that covered in cloth or gray linen.
Capitol .xii.	Twelfth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the Cauterization of Water Descending into the Wound.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you at the beginning of water in the wound through the signs which I have said in the section, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens the head of him, and guard against all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that soak in bath water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to let his head grow, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water flowing from two wounds, or from one side if it is the beginning of water flowing from one wound.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Open up with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left by the cord; and let the cauteries be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of bleeding when it is being cauteryzed; and if you see blood flowing from it, stop the flow with some medicine that is at your disposal.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will come to know the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the absorption of those things and caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauteryzed in the skull between two bones with two cauteries produced at the end.
Capitol .xiii.	Thirteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are ancient and accumulated through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is excessive moist phlegmatic humor, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into wounds, and with a cautery in the middle part of the head and with two cauteries in the skull between two temples, and with two cauteries in the skull between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need an addition, then cauterize that on the entire length of the wound's back over the outer rim with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Fourteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the Cauterization of Bad Breath.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that with water as we have said in the section and your treatment does not bring relief, then prepare yourself and give to drink to the patient three cups of chicory for three nights; and then remove the head covering from him, and cauterize it with a middle-sized olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a clove-shaped cautery and two cauteries on both outer rims of the head, just above the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery so that you do not cut into it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And with the clove-shaped cautery, this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Fifteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the Cauterization of Softening of Eyelids from Wounds.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of a wound is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery having this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize that on both outer rims a little with two cauteries all around, and let them be stretched from the temporal regions.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the outer rim.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is habituated.
Capitol .xvi.	Sixteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of a Wound when the Skin is Converted to the Inside and Punches the Wound.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the wound is converted to the inside just like it punches the wound, cauterize those in two ways: either by fire or by medicine which combines.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If by a cauterization of fire, command the patient to keep his skin thus as those which are cleansed by water, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if you punch that wound, then make him hold his breath, and then strengthen the wounds with a bandage so that it is not disfigured until the skin is born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when the skin is born and equalized, then pause the patient's head in your seat, and then sign above the eyelid of the wounds with a tent sign, with a signal that is according to the figure of a mirth leaf, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a poultice wrapped in linen or mucus of papyrus on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery which has this form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the figure which you have signaled, little by little, in several times, until the surface of the cord is burned like a leaf of myrtle, entirely appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the signal of health for this work is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the skin of it raised above the point of the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And therefore lift your hand and leave that for three days, and then pause on it with cloth until the scar is elevated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if some cause returns to the skin and makes it swell again, then make another time the cautery on that just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is on the eyelid remaining, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized so that the skin does not hurt the wound.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with medicine that combines is this: you command the patient to keep his skin thus until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a bandage of cloth in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take one ounce of known soap and one ounce of fresh vinegar. The end! And if there is anything else, then mix those causes well, and make it with a feast so that it is not cooled; and then spread the water over the cloth which is made in this shape like a leaf of myrtle, and pause that on one wound or both; and pause the wound wrapped in linen, and the patient's head be in your seat.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And pause the said thing on the medicine and press that a little and not disfigure until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for biting is in it just like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And therefore, when it becomes apparent that the patient is feeling the biting of the medicine, then take away the medicine and wash that with your said water; and then consider if the eyelid has been lifted thus as it was washed with fire or incision, for then it is good; and if not, then return to that medicine on the location where the medicine had not taken effect and do not disfigure until your operation is equalized and the wound is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on it with cloth until the scar of adaptation is eradicated, and then cure that with an ointment or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to be vigilant and diligent in your operation so that no residue of the medicine falls on the wound, and if the eyelid becomes swollen again after some days and some skin cause punctures on the wound, then repeat your medicine on that location where the eyelid has become swollen, and do exactly as you did at the beginning, and then apply it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the wounds of men are diversified according to their magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And may not be hidden the way of righteousness from him who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Seventeenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the Cauterization of Fistula that is in the Lacrimal of the Wound.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure fistula with water as we have said in the sections of diseases and your treatment does not correspond, then take care that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to pause his head on his seat, and hold his head with some minister between the two seats in such a way that he is neither troubled nor agitated by his own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a poultice wrapped in linen or mucus of papyrus on the wound of it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is curved, just like the shape of a cane or a whip of a tortoise, from one end to the other where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, it should come out like a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But however, the one that is curved is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press on the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry up that place.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then work on it and extract the discharge from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the cautery on it which is well ignited, and take with you the bandage to wrap around that part of the wound near the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient may be troubled, and then pause the cautery in the gray matter of the wound and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and otherwise, then repeat the cautery one or two times, as necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then pause on that spot with cloth wrapped around and surrounded by a drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it has passed 11 days and is not healed, then pause on that spot with a sharp cutting medicine until the bone is exposed and roughened according to what is suitable in your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier doctors also described: take the location of the fistula and fill it with that and then pause in that small fissure whose shape is like this: Pour into that the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and take your hand with a gentle grip, and do not let the patient be troubled because the molten lead may penetrate to the wound of that spot; and take care to pause on the wound of the patient wrapped in cloth or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and cure, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to administer a cut of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to where it will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Eighteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the Cauterization of the Wound of the Pots.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times cracks occur on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those cracks with water as we have said in the sections and your treatment does not take effect, then ignite the small cauterizing knife according to this shape that is seen:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the curvature of it be according to the subtlety of a scimitar.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And then pause that cautery gently in those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Nineteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth an apostema forms and becomes inflamed, and then breaks out, and is antiquated, and a fistula is formed, and you cure it but your treatment does not take effect, then take care that you ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, and place that ignited thing into the hole of the fistula, and with your hand guide the hot iron until it reaches the bottom of the wound, and at the end of it do this once or twice; and then cure it with water as we have said for curing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore, if the pus is abscessed and is healed, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the location and expose the rotten bone according to what will be found in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Twentieth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you cure them with medicines but they do not correspond, then pause the patient's head on your seat, and ignite the cautery in the shape of which will come accordingly, namely that you pause the quill over the tooth and insert into it the hot iron quickly, and take care to guide your hand so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then have the patient drink a mouthful of salt water and hold it for an hour, and then stop, because the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Twenty-First Chapter.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the Cauterization of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or in it is cold or warm, and the cure with medicine does not correspond, then make a cautery there in two ways: either with a cow's border, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauteri am boder is when you take the border of cows and boil it in a cauldron with iron, and then take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the tent, and then immerse that boiled border in hot water, and pause that on the painful tooth quickly until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse a piece of cloth or cloth in the boiling water above said, and pause that on the painful tooth, and then pause on that hot iron until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But however, the cautery with fire is that you wait for the glowing tip of iron or steel, and it should be in the heart of it some roughness, and the intensity of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the shape that will come, and pause it on the tooth, and guide your hand so that the cautery is cooled; and do this several times until the pain is relieved either on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And take care that by the impression of that cautery, the patient fills his mouth with good border and holds it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as you wish, extreme or not, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the quill:
Capitol .xxii.	Twenty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the Cauterization of Extrophulas.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophulas are full of flesh and cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to lighten the digestion of those, then ignite the cautery curved in this shape having two broad ends so that the smoke of the cautery escapes through the other end, and pause it ignited on that apostema once, and again if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and take care to leave it for three days and then pause on that spot wrapped in cloth until what the fire has burned away is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with an ointment, tents, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the quill or cautery for this purpose is to be conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	Twenty-Third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the Cauterization of Sore Throats and Strangulation of Ale.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors come up to the trachea of the lung, and especially when this is due to coldness of congestion, then take care that the patient be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize it by reaching the root of the cough in the affected location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And take care not to let the cautery reach the throat nor burn away the membrane of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And then cauterize that with another cautery reaching the junction of the neck at the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery should be shaped like a claw, as before described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with water as was previously described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the Cauterization of Lung Disease and Cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors and the patient has no fever or tissuage, but is an old illness, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected locations, one above and one below; and with another cautery in the middle location of the back between two nipples; and let the cautery be shaped like a claw according to the previous description.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make the cautery piercing with the point of the cautery that is called puncta, in the shape which precedes in the piercing of earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let the points go into those; and then cure it with water as was previously described until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauteries have three rumps where cauterization is done with those: in one go, you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the Cauterization of Titilliation, which is the Head of the Auxiliary.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the auxiliary is displaced due to lubricous humors and does not settle in its original place upon returning, but rather moves away from it as we have testified, then take care to reduce the displacement first, and then have the patient be reversed onto his back or side; and elevate the membrane which is at the posterior part of the citilliation up to the upper parts with your left hand, if the juncture is displaced backwards.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the membrane until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will be that of four heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and then those subtle ones according to the quantity of tenderness; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And several times it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause on the cautery with pure salt, and take care to make the patient adhere to tranquility, and not be harmed by anything for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is above and there is made so, then take care to cauterize on the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or with pointed puncture-cauteries, because the juncture is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and many humors come into the stomach, exceeding its capacity and multiplying rumblings within it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment but they do not correspond, then take care that the patient be reversed onto his back, and extend his arms and legs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one leaving the ribs for the quantity of a finger's width with a claw-shaped cautery, and two leaving the sides of the chest with two pointed cauteries, until the figure of a triangular cautery is obtained; and prolonging them so that they do not become adjusted to make a pressure.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the membrane.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery is according to this shape without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this shape; and that will be one cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this shape:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And then the stomach is pierced punctually at that point which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish with tenderness, and then cauterize it with a cautery in those points; and then cure it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the Cauterization of Fretful Feet.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the pain arises in the feet due to coldness or humidity or excessive ventilation, exceeding its normal capacity and causing excessive effusion through egressio superflua, and the patient is not cured with water as we have described, then take care that the patient be reversed onto his neck, and sense three cauteries according to this shape and quantity applied to the feet left of the hipbones, where it will reach the decubitus of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and the cauteries are in the shape of the length of a straight arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress your own motion with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water used is equal to the quantity of the membrane's thickness, and not more adjusted; and if the patient stays on his feet; and if he is not standing, then lie down, which has stretched out its arms and raised its shoulders.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cutlery-shaped cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And take care not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the subtlety of all the membrane be taken into account so that it may be taken into all the vessels, for the membrane here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the Perforation of Apostemas of the Feet with a Cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an ulcer or apostema arises in the foot and you wish to know if that apostema is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin of it, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will be troubled by gravity and pain will not be alleviated.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then with great pain it will be alleviated and many times you will fatigue doctors in its cure.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then take care that the patient be reversed onto his neck; and sense the location of the apostema with tenderness; and then ignite the cautery which is similar to a rag, its shape having been described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize with that cautery until all the membrane is burned away, until it reaches the bone, until in it you will find health.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that patient through treatment of other apostemas until he is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cauterization unless you have studied it in the art of medicine and have experienced many illnesses; but this one has been tested some times and has been bold on this operation, but yet leave that to us, and is more sweet.
Capitol .xxix.	Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the Cauterization of Pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology are to be applied to pleurisy with coldness according to this manner, and it is what you take from the roots of aristology, a long dry root that is found, and it is as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and ignite it at the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries, one slightly declining to the side below the beard, and with two more in that location which declines between the fifth rib and the navel, declining slightly towards the back; and another in the middle location of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three more behind; and one cautery in that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and two more on the two sides of the foot, leaving out the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not compress your own hand with the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifestation of the membrane at work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it is said by some ancient ones that they have seen some men who used a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignited it, and then placed it in that location which is between the ribs, until it reaches that apostema and health is restored, just as we have said in the apostema of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for if you act quickly, the wound will soon be healed and the fistula will close without being cured.
Capitol .xxx.	Thirty-First Chapter.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the Cauterization of the Melancholy.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of melancholy with water as we have described in the division and your treatment does not correspond, then take care to use a cautery there in three ways, all of which are drawing ones, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melancholy, just like the figure of the cauteries of the foot, whose shape has been described before.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of the cautery is the manner which we have described in the cauteries of the foot similarly.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your own hand with the cautery; and the patient should lie on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another manner of cauterizing, which is that you ignite the cautery having two handles, the kind we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the membrane which is at the end of the melancholy where the patient's left side is located.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And be your elevation that which lifts up the membrane according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries may be made according to the latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then enter between the two handles, ignite one, and make it penetrate into the membrane of the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries will be made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three handles.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then care for the cautery more than usual for several days, because it is more certain that other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Thirty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the Cauterization of Hydrocephalus.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries do not cure hydrocephalus, but rather only properly situated ones.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrocephalus with the methods of treatment which we have described in the division and your treatment does not correspond, then take care to use four cauteries around the navel, one over the stomach, one over the foot, one over the melancholy, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportioned to the subtlety of the membrane.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery untouched for a long time, so that it may heal slowly.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery with water as is necessary, and thus two intentions are added to it, and it will be hastened by aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is claw-shaped according to the shape that precedes it, and that one with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Thirty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the Cauterization of Feet and Limbs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostematized in hydrophobic patients and filled with stagnant water, take care to cauterize the feet on the back of the knee without applying any water that is between the auricular and anular bones, and lift up your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then lift up your hand and do not return it entirely, for the stagnant water resists.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	And then make two cauteries on each limb, and on each limb, make a cautery at the extremity of the cutlery-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And then make the cauteries according to the length of the limb: one at the top and another at the middle location of the limb; and on each limb, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And then leave the wound open without treatment for a long time, so that some water may drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure with those causes which we have described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Thirty-Third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the Cauterization of Abdominal Organs.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal organs are weakened by cold and humidity to such a degree that they are unable to perform their natural functions, namely the digestive and retentive virtues, which reside in the stomach and intestines, and if treatment with water does not correspond and the patient suffers from a cauterization of virtue exhibited, then take care to cauterize it with a large cautery on the stomach as described previously in the chapter on cauterization of the stomach, with a ring-shaped cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a claw-shaped subtle cautery; or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if at times excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then take care to cauterize on the small intestine and on the intestines, and firmly place two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for it is a perfect cure of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature there remain old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors, frozen or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with water as we have described in the division and your treatment does not correspond, then take care to cauterize with three cauteries on the remaining spondilh of the little back and small triangular ones, and with a cautery above the navel that falls between two digits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe that the stomach of the patient is frozen and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is repeatedly apostematized, then take care to cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and one cautery on the foot, and another cautery on the melancholy of the patient with a claw-shaped cautery; and leave the cautery open for some time, and then cure the patient until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the Cauterization of Athletes near their Abdomen.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise athletes, then take care to ignite the cautery which is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And then insert that ignited cautery into the excised athlete, and lastly apply your hand to guide it until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make it once or twice, for if athletes are many, then take care to cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and then cure them with water that corresponds to their wounds until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, it is more difficult in judgment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the Cauterization of Fistulas that are formed in Nature at the End of Parts of the Body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is terrified by this, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the end of nature, and it is old, filled with pus and corrupted moisture, then what is more worthy than to try that with subtle intent, and take care to know the quantity of the depth of it with the aforementioned tent.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And then ignite the cautery which is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place that ignited cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity which the tent reaches.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then iterate on that cautery until those corrupted bodies are consumed at once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And take care not to burn the nerves or veins; or if the fistula goes into the bladder or intestines, then take care of all those places; and do not make it so until the fistula is in a fleshy location and you are certain that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and all the matter has been excised from it, and remains thus for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not removed from there, then know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting or falling into those causes of which a memory will be recalled in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the Cauterization of Bronchi.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the bronchi there is pain due to cold or great ventosity, and by this the patient's cough is alleviated, then take care that you cauterize on those bronchi with a cautery over each bronchus with a claw-shaped cautery of which the remembrance precedes.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And firmly place two cauteries on the second one, a little way apart, so that there will be three linear cauteries, and therefore they will be more difficult in judgment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debilitation and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient does not retain urine, then take care to cauterize on the most posterior part of the bladder, where the hairs of the small intestine begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the nodes of the foot; and cauterize with one cautery on the most inferior part of the back, or with two if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And be a claw-shaped cautery according to the process described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the Cauterization of the Marrow.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and moisture come into the marrow, and therefore conception is prohibited, and the menstrual courses of her are corrupted, and the prompting of them is delayed, and there occurs pain in the bearing down of them, then take care that the place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have described for the bladder; and one cautery on the most posterior part of the back, or two, and be the claw-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Fortieth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist dislocations are poured out on the part of the ankle, and caused by swelling of the same location, and the sign is that the limb is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found in the part where the bone is broken.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then take care to cauterize the patient on the part of the ankle with a ring-shaped cautery similar to a circle, as you have noted in the tent of the circuit of the same part, and thereby the part falls into the middle location of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And be the cautery which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not before you, then take care to cauterize with three cauteries and one large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the subtlety of all the membrane; and then cure that place until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Fortieth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes to the part of the ankle, and its cause is cold and moisture, the patient is cured with water as we have described and does not correspond, and this is old, then take care that you release the patient from gross humors with stinking pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that place.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery in that case is according to two methods: or a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And thus according to two scientific methods, one of which is to cauterize that place on the part of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this shape; and make good depth in them.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And be the space between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the digit, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	But sometimes be the cautery on the middle location above the head of the ankle, so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, then cauterize with the circle of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and it shall be a containing circle that burns out the subtlety of all the membrane.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain clings to the ankle and does not spread into the joint.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it spreads into the joint, then take care to cauterize with two cauteries on the joint over the location where the patient feels the pain; and one cautery on the hollow for four fingers a little above the hairy part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutaneous, and be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the subtlety of the membrane.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain is spread into the location near the three or four fingers, then take care to cauterize there with a cautery for three or four points or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains of pain behind the kneecap when looking at the joint, then take care to cauterize there with a cutaneous cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And take care in all cauterization that you do not finish the cautery until you have burned out nerves or large arteries, and thereby it is against the patient's interest or causes harm.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already and seen one and another of those who were cauterized on the hollow and finally in the cauterization, and their leg was filled with inflamed fire until the tumor reached the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then suddenly a severe solution of the belly occurred, and thereby death approached.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men say that in the cauterization of the ankle, this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron, with the circuit being half the size of a palm; and be the orifice as large as an almond shell or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle be another tierce; and be the space between them the quantity of the nodes of the foot; and let those circles be above two parts; and be the length of them one node or two nodes, and make in those margins an iron decently apparelled in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And then be ignited in the fire until it becomes red and throws sparks, and then be placed upon the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that place with three circular cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that place for three days, apply a poultice to it with a border and leave the wound open for many days; and then cure that place with medicines until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Thus says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this type of cautery we have used little because of the terror of looking at it, and therefore few have been found who look upon it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But from good cauteries on him who suffered them, and finds with that the place of his.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cauteries with medicinal adhesions are those which you make two circles having a perforated armula in which the guaffle of the iron door is placed; be the length of the walls in the nave, namely two nodes or as many as there are.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is the quantity of the thickness of the digit; and let them be above and below, and let them contain themselves within each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place it on the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side, and compress your hand over the part of the ankle; and then take cold water and pour it between the two circles, and let the quality of that be with a small fire gradually, and keep it for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and sticking of it - for that biting is like that of fire - until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the cold water from all of the ankle with lukewarm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave that place for three days and apply a border to it until the blackness of the sticking is reduced, and leave it so for some days, and then run with it a purging; this is the last in judgment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place with medicines until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is spread into the joint or knee, make a statue of it in water according to how it is made in the ankle equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of cold water, and you have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of causes not extinguished from both ankles, one part of each; mix them and place them in a new wave of which the left part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And then place the bottom of one wave into another wave inverted, and pour over that alkali and living causes with lukewarm water which absorbs those for one finger's length; and thus you compress them with my own hand for good compression, and leave the hole which will descend from the lukewarm water into the left part of the wave inverted.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another alkali renewed, for that which is done by me is of great force, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, for this operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines are mixed with those which are cauterized on the ankle, such as mezereum and myrrh, and causes with salt aniseed, so that they may be mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen recounted the story of an ancient man who was operated on and cured by the procedure which cured ankle pain and sciatic vein pain, and magnified its greatness, saying that it did not require any other cure, and thus he was healed in one go just as recommended, for truly that man quickly recovered from his illness.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that which is pressed with certain ragweed, and if not found, a fresh fig; and some is mixed with a little gray powder and applied to the ankle where the pain is, or in the joint, or in the knee, and tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it is left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient perceives a relaxation of the sticking.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then take it out and thus when the body of him is flushed, put it in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use these medicines with cautery unless there is a proper evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But already Asclepiades says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a wound of a goat, it will approach the patient's bed; and let the cautery be done according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the soles.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dried goat skin and inflate it with fire until it is made into carbon; and then place it on the wool and leave it in until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches the ankle and brings rest to the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the "cauteri of vaquas".
Capitol .xlii.	The end of the 42nd chapter.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	At times pain is in both places due to multiple causes, such as by crushing or piercing or excessive evacuation, and similar causes, namely the infusion of moist and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not used except in this single species which is made by the effusion of moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then it is necessary to evacuate the patient with bitter pills and similar ones that are made on both places where the pain is, three lines according to the latitude of the place, plus signs with ten in each line or more, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the medicine.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let it be done by a point cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, then cauterize with three or four cauteries or with a middle clavial cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	The 43rd chapter.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the Cauterization at the Beginning of Goutiness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease begins in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs suddenly on their tenderness in the elbow, accompanied by elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find it in the last vertebra of the spine and the nodes of it that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you find this and wish to prevent it, immediately cauterize that place with a circle cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which takes the cautery on all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, then cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with a point cautery two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be properly spaced between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the place until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cautery should not be administered in gout caused by spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	The 44th chapter.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains are caused by moist humors which are absorbed into each member of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this "podagra" properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore since gout caused by moist humors is cured with a method of cure and the pains are not relapsed, then relapsing cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize that place with proper evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot, using many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is an olive-shaped cautery whose form is this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary that points be made on the fascia of the foot, then make them with a point cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise to the knuckles or to other joints, and many times it develops, then cauterize that place on each knuckle with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are necessary for these cauteries to be at your disposal, then cauterize that place and do not press too hard with the cautery before, so that it is only slightly applied around the subtlety of the membrane.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise to the knuckle and the spine, then administer the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the most part and is called "suagra", then puncture in the circle of the joints as it revolves, puncturing on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the said places, then puncture in the circle of the joints on each node and on the tip of the finger.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise near the joints or muscles after some days, then cauterize all of them on both sides of the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient with good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and evacuation is made with this cautery, then the patient will be healed, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	The 45th chapter.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the Cauterization of Ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When rupture occurs in the groin and says that the bulge is before the navel at the genital region, and it begins to approach, then it is necessary for you to tell the patient to stop eating on the same day and to use gentle causes so that the wound may descend from the belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to hold his arm up until the hole is made or the navel or bulge appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return to that place with your fingers, and signal to the patient to make an attempt at rupture on the bone of the pelvis, signaling the extremity of which is similar to half a circle at the separated parts of the breast.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery whose form is this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is a good red and gives sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the bulge or navel to its natural shape, and place your hand on the location so that the bulge does not swell.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already passed between the patient's joints and left one joint, another serving on his knees, and another on his feet, which has its own hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that spot, signaled by your hand with the cautery standing straight, and continue to apply it until you reach the bone of the pelvis into the midst of the duodenum; and repeat that procedure again if you have not achieved success in the first attempt into the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the appearance of the bulge at the time of your cautery, that you do not burn that bulge, lest it cause harm to the patient or bring about great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you apply the cautery do not touch the bone, nor do you confer your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their great and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then cure the location of the cautery for three days with a border, until the scar of the fire is renewed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place with other remedies until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient lies on his back for 40 days until the wound is sealed and the pain is gone.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary that you moderate the patient's nutrition according to the length of time of their healing, and that the bulge does not swell outside due to the effort of recovering.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then, after 40 days, gradually reduce his diet and keep him on it for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he is reduced to light labor and moderate nourishment and drink, and violent speech, for when he uses this regimen of entire healing, then he will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you will say the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and wish that they do not fail, then cauterize the rupture with a redon cautery according to the quantity of it, and this is what is exhausted from the navel as the third part of it; and then cure that place with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some of the first ones have already said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is signaled by intent:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is a paused line that goes through the latitude in the left side more above the rupture, and another line above; and then place your hand with a clavial cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	The 46th chapter.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Twist.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When it occurs in some members by crushing or piercing pain and persists that pain for a long time and does not respond to cure with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize with a point cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And it is the cautery of the entire member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and debilitation, location of twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well and good; and otherwise, then repeat the cautery on him; for it is customary with those pains that they are punctured into the member which approaches the one being treated, in order to achieve this with a cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	The 47th chapter.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers have been cured with a cautery by great divine aid, and more so if the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you wish to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and does not spread, nor is it static, and fear for the patient that corruption comprehends all of their body and all their composition; then cauterize that place on the head with 9 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and a second just below it, up to the forehead; and two on each ear, and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand with the cautery will make a slight impression on the bone, and from there, the scabs will be dislocated, so that the exhalation of gross vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the nose according to what was prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already expanded on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary for you to cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two on both cheekbones, and two on both vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one on each vertebra close to the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on each hip, and one on each hipbone, and two on each knee, and one on each kneecap, and two on both shoulders, and two on both muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's feet; and cauterize that place on all the joints of the said arms and legs, and on each heel of the patient's feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are on top of the calf, lest you burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more they are beneficial and conferent; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just as they do with their own, because the body of the patient is already stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be great or small according to the members and joints, as predetermined by the species of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with flour of ears cooked in honey and other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	The 48th chapter.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some member is stuporized or asleep and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that stuporized member with cauteries according to the greatness of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And your cautery should go a little bit into the thickness of the cord.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place with remedies until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which occurs in the arms and legs, and on the vertebrae of the back, and then the sensation of the nerves which govern that member returns, and the stupor is renewed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not venture further on this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	The 49th chapter.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the Cauterization of Moles that are Morbid.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When a mole is ancient and does not respond to any of the remedies of medicine, then you should cauterize on that place with a preon cautery for a little bit according to the quantity of the specie of the cord until the whiteness and color of it are renewed, and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place with flour of ears and lentils mixed with red oil and leaves of arnagrosa, and with the blood of dove or the blood of vulture, each one a part, and all are mixed together; and then apply a cloth to the location and place it there until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	The 50th chapter.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the Cauterization of Cramp.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cramp is beginning and you want to stop it, then cauterize that place with a circular cautery in the circle of it, just as it revolves.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me it is not seen this way, for I fear it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to be cauterized in the circle of it with a circular cautery, just as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	The 51st chapter.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the Cauterization of Blistering.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some blistering is delayed in maturation, and so it is because of superfluous fluids causing it, or due to the state of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of blistering; then cauterize in the circle of it with many small punctate cauteries; and then release that which is fasting for maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it; and place that in the middle location of blistering until it penetrates the cord.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that location is more behind, because the arm's body is alleviated; and then cure that place until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	The 52nd chapter.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the Cauterization of Corroding.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corroding is a walking corruption in the member, which corrupts it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that corroding is in a location which can suffer a cautery with fire, then you should ignite small to large cauteries, many and few, according to what is convenient in that location where it is corroding.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that place from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then release that place for three days, and pause on the locations cauterized with a thin layer of oil mixed with it until all the scars are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then cure that place with flesh-generating remedies.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy and free from corruption in which there is no decay, well and good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that place that is rotting in the corrupted locations.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corroding is medicated some times with acute medicine, because that is halfway to a cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But in any case, a cautery with fire is of greater and more prompt aid.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure for it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have understanding of it.
Capitol .liii.	The 53rd chapter.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Knots and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times it happens that the parts left behind from a bad illness which is called a knot, and it is a great, inflamed cause that causes the foot to be lame; and cauterization in those places is done in two ways, namely with fire and with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But the cautery with fire is when you ignite the cautery with a concave shape similar to a pen nib, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the knot from all parts, and it has subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then pause that which is ignited on the knot, and then rotate your hand with the cautery in the circle of the knot until the cautery reaches the depth of the knot.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And then release that place for three days until the flesh begins to grow back.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that place with wild mallows beaten with salt, and leave the poultice on that place for one night, so that it may be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place with flesh-generating remedies until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and many times it happens so in the surface of the body, mostly on the arms and legs, then you must administer a cautery with hot water; which is to take a quill made of iron or bone or pen nib, and place that on the knot; and then pour into the quill a small amount of hot water, and grasp your hand, and rotate that with compression of your hand from all sides, and apply pressure to the edge of the quill in the root of the knot, and allow the hot water to flow through the preon of the root of the cau; and wait for the patient a little while for the sting of the hot water for an hour, and then remove that, so that the knot with its roots is eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do it for those and then apply the other remedy until you have arrived at all of them from their own in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those places where the roots of the knots are eradicated with this remedy of the medicines which bring forth flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	The 54th chapter.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the Cauterization of Trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When it occurs to someone with some trembling due to irritation of the nerve or because of fever caused by irritation, or for another similar reason, then you should cauterize that place with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and on the feet of him, and on the stomach of him, with an olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of him subsides and hastens the recovery of the illness caused by irritation.
Capitol .lv.	The 55th chapter.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Blows to the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are accidental blows and pustules which burst open, causing wounds made of gross corrupted matters; then it is necessary at first appearance, that it should be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended by fire; or with the roots of long-leafed erestology; or with a lentecular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize again at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; and do not believe it, and excess fluids are removed from those places, and they heal from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But in any case, it is necessary that this be done with proper evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	The 56th chapter.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding due to Incision of Arterial Wounds.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times there occurs bleeding of the arteries which is caused by the wound that precedes it, or from the incision of apostemes or cautery of a member, and then similar things happen, and it is difficult to stop that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when it happens to you, then take your hand and place it on the orifice of the artery, and apply pressure on that with your said finger many times until the flow of blood is stopped by your said finger, and there is no more bleeding.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then pause with the fire the olive cauteries, small and large, by name many, and blow on them until they are well ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large olive cautery according to the location and wound where the artery is torn, on that vein, hastening more than you would have removed the said blood, and apply the cautery until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your said finger and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from among the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to apply it repeatedly until the bleeding stops.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that you bring another evil upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when the artery flows blood, then it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those places, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: or with a cautery such as we have said, or with extraction, for when it is extracted the ends of it are burned and the bleeding is stopped; or that it be tied with a ligature or a bandage by strong constriction, or that there be applied medicines whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they are strengthened with poultices and binding in decent manner.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers restraint decently with ligature and bandage or by constriction with cloths or by position of burning causes and similar things does not come forth until later.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this should happen to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine, then work with the pause of the said finger on the orifice of that vein just as we have said, and understand that the great constriction of it until the bleeding stops from the upper part of the wound, and on the artery the said finger is not removed; and above the artery be sprinkled with hot water of very great coldness so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and then consider what kind of cautery or medicine is needed.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second part begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On the Incision and Perforation, and Ventouses, and Phlebotomy, and Wounds, and their similar things.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all illnesses where cautery with fire is suitable and comburent medicine, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from head to feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I proceed in this chapter by this manner, so that the one seeking this may be illuminated on what has been asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, son, learn that in this chapter it is about the same things as are in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore it is necessary that there be great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation occurs which is with blood and in which life depends on the injection of the vein or incision over the apostema or awareness of exit or purging of the wound or extraction of sageta or incision of peyra and their similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all those, terror and trembling are accompanied, and in most of them, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that may not fall upon you this which is the cause of death, for some times you will have to learn the ways of men with many diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among those is some who will depart with their own disease and it is light for them to die, and thus by the vehemence of that which they find in their disease, and by the length of their disease, and because the disease itself is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is one who gives you his own son and property, while you are expecting his recovery, and his own disease is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not necessary that you consent to him who comes to you with this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not assume any cause over it unless aprop scientific certainty which verifies what you see, and through which the succession of praiseworthy things may come.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your illnesses prophetic and indicative signs which are converted to health, for in that is aid to you concerning the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God breathes His understanding into you and does not leave you direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinct by chapters as it preceded in the chapter on cauteries, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be illuminated for you what you seek and about which you have need.
Capitol primier.	The first chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the Cure of Water which is contained in the Head of Children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often occurs in children during childbirth and when the midwife tightens the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have never seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, death has been near, and thus it is left undone in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water overflowed, and his head was always magnificently swollen to the point where it could not be contained within itself because of the grandeur of his head, and even more so, the moisture increased to the point of mortal fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added either between the bone and the skull or added behind the bone above the cranium.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Therefore, the operation in that case is to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be about two inches, so that the moisture flows through it, and this is the form of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the moisture is more increased and the apostema is greater, then there are two incisions according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is behind the bone, then it is signified by you that you should widen the commissures of the head in all parts and the water is squeezed out when you compress that with your said hand on the parts inside and not be hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then apply the incision and extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the fissures with cloths and poultices; and then introduce this mixture of vinegar and oil on the fifth day, and then release the bandage and cure the wound with gentle remedies, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another manner of incision, which takes into account the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water, for some times it is more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or in the right side, or in the left side; and therefore attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the filling of water, and make there what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid blood flowing from it, and the patient may die due to this flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the Incision of Arteries which are near the ears, called Hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When it happens to someone that has cataracts or wounds on the eyes or feet, and this is old and does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore it is necessary when you want to incise those which the patient's head is affected by, and then freshen the location with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider on pulsing the vein; and the locations of each on the locations which are near the ears are depressed, and so much so that they are only visible in certain men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then signal on the artery with a tentative touch, and then incise each one with a spatula of each part as acute as the incision penetrates into the bone, and this is in the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at the incisions in the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' breadth, because when some vein is incised the blood flows out with pulsatile gushing, which springs forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three fingers' breadth, and then signal with a tentative touch, and make an incision into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And as much blood as is necessary to be taken away is one ounce of wine. and not too much or too little blood is taken away, and all of this is according to the quantity which appears to be the virtue of the patient's disease and the filling of the artery in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the skull, then incise this so that no apostema may develop.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and then cure that with gentle remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Third Chapter.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the Extraction of Arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When to someone there occurs an ancient or migrainous headache, caused by excessive humidity and quality in the lacertae of the temples, or an old and vehement one similar to those, and it is medicated with the methods of cure of medicine, but this does not conform, then we have resorted to extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient scratches the skin which is on the temples; and understand that the artery appears in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden from few men except by the intensity of heat.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then freshen the location with a rough cloth or evaporate the location with hot water until it appears to you manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the spatula of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then take the spatula of which this is the form:
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then envelop that with the extremity of the onyx, and then incise one part from that according to the quantity by which the extremities of him are lengthened and contracted, and not allow blood flow, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate one ounce of blood. within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you ligate that in two places with double-folded cedema or cords at length, and do not allow putrefaction to occur before the consolidation of the wound and avoid blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two bandages, and do this at that hour or approximately another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone and a cutlary cautery until the extremities of him are incised, and remain in that location of the said work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is in a state of scalding complexity; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish off humidities, and therefore it is better in judgment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary that you extract the arteries which fill the location of an old wound, and let them be paused on decently made poultices, and then be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and with some remedies until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another time the blood flow from the artery occurs, then you should catch that blood and restrain it, either with a cauterization or by filling the location of the wound, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those is not present to you, then pause your said hand over the location until the blood is congealed, and then fill the location with hot water of vehement warmth so that the acuteness repose, and be strengthened according as is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And this is the easier method in extracting an artery: that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with a tentative touch, and then place each one, moderately ignited, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of him may be elongated, for it is not fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two handles shall be examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But however if the sharpness is less than that of two handles, it is better, for if they are keen like two handles close to each part, and do not incise the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, it is held that the heat of the fire is in them and the flesh is absorbed somewhat.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space which is between two handles is the quantity of the thickness of that.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the Cure of Corrupt Eyes with Sharp and Acid Tears.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acid tears, and the body of those veins which are above the forehead on the top of the head is outside, and does not conform to any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient is already reddened and senses a wandering motion in his own forehead as if it were a march of ants, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, moistened so that their eyelids are condensed, and the eyelids are scarred by the acuteness of the tears, the ancient physicians mixed in the cure of those with this operation, and named that cure with a spatula.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And this is that you command the patient to tear off the skin which is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two fingers' breadth: one fissure be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the lacertae which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuity of both jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers' breadth adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or cloth, moderately moistened with which you can absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, whose form is as follows:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape with that all the codena which is between two incisions on the skull which is above the bone, and then make this of the incision to migrate into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then strengthen yourself with this spatula and enter into the first incision another time with a different instrument called cutellar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the edge of that sharp instrument against the skin attached to the codena, and the edge of it will cut into the bone, and push that in until it reaches the fissure, and then incise with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But that incision should be continued up to where it appears on the codena, and then make this in the middle fissure into another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And since a quantity of blood flows, express the places where the clots of blood are congealed.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then pause in each fissure, and place on those powders well mixed with wine, oil, and vinegar, and make sure that there is no development of a cauterized apostema.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer great abundance of hot water or tepid water, and then cure with gentle remedies, such as basilicon oil, rosy oil, and others, until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Fifth Chapter.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the Cure of Tears through Cautery and those which descend from the parties behind the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When someone has very hot and continuous cauterized tears, and the patient's eyes are exhausted and small, and the regard of theirs is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and their skin peeled, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know through these accidents that the matters and cauterization do not come from many veins of the parties behind proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to scratch his forehead, and then incise a fissure at the middle of the forehead, a little bit for the latitude (and begin from the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incised into the bone; and extend your hand over the lacertae of the temples which are attached to the mastigacio), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the blood with a sponge or cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or bandages.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen above with powders well mixed in wine and oil, so that there is no development of a cauterized apostema.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have removed that and see that the apostema is already diminished, then it is necessary to freshen the bone until it begins to produce flesh, and then cure with a drying regimen which will cause the flesh to appear, just as if you take two parts of barley flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from this make an embalming paste and administer it to these wounds in the natural birthplace of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Sixth Chapter.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the Cure of That Which Catches in the Ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that catch in the ears are one of four species, for either it is mineral pyre or a similar cause, such as iron and vermillion, or it is from a plant, such as cheese or fava, or it is a fluidic cause, such as hot water and vinegar and their likenesses, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when pyre catches in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not agree with the ear, and pause the ear at the sun, and if sometimes the pyre appears, then you should distill into that some cause of violet oil or musk, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the stornutation in suitable conditions, and apply the nose to the event of stornutation.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then pause in the cavity of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, for many times it is forgotten due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if not, then you should administer the extraction of it with the instrument called "gesti" epicicario, subtle of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten with "gesti", then it is so; and otherwise, you should administer the extraction of it with an onyx subtle of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not forgotten by this, then you should make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear and close around the tube with wax and soft oil so that only the tube may be opened.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with the gentle touch and strong attraction, for many times as this which we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then you should take from the lighted candle or the prepared wax with which the birds are attracted to take a small quantity, and pause that in the extremity of ray, and then wrap around that spot decently paused.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then extract the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not forgotten by all the causes which we have recounted, then you should be cautious to cut that before it develops into cauterized apostema or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting that is: first you should anoint the patient with the vein sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cease between your hands and convert the ear into the upper parts, and then make a small fissure in the root of the ear where the grey matter is located before you.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure be of lunar shape until it reaches the pyre, and when the pyre is blackened, stop that if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure in that hour with speed, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause catches in the ear is one of the fats that agree and are inflamed, then you should administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your eye sight, then you should take a subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that the incision of that fat which is caught in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not make it when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in many pieces, and then extract from those with onyx or subtle gesti, or by incision as we have said, because it facilitates the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use stornutation with suitable conditions at the beginning, and fill his own ear with a little old cloth, and then place that over the ear in which is the water, and if forgotten by this, well; otherwise, take many small pyre stones and lions according to the length of the finger, and calcine those in the fire for a short time, and then have the patient insert one of those into the hole of his own ear and let it settle on that side of that part and strike with another pyre stone over the pyre which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not cease this process with pyre until all the water has been forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take from paper or from bone. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the fire until the wax of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another bone and make this so many times until all the water is forgotten, and extract that with a tube as we have said above of the pyre extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is small and similar to a pea, then extract it as we have said above; but if it is of great size which appears to the sense of feeling, then you should administer the extraction with gesti and onyx, and the cause of it becomes easier than all the other causes that catch in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worm generated in the ear, when you cure that with what we have said above and in the treatise on distillations, and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary to observe the ear at the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if there appears any cause of worms, then you should extract that with gesti or subtle onyx; but if no cause appears, then you should take a tube made from a reed and above it is broadened in the shape of this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And then insert the subtle end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then suck it with strong suction, and make this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your eye sight, then you should apply and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which the ancients have already tried in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of iron, made from a reed, with a small hole and above it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore as you are about to do that which is in the cavity of the tube of containment, here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the ray and wrap it around the end of it decently and tightly, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ascension, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the tube — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the ray with a tight grip above and press gently with your hand on that with a temperate compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ascension and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted in the ear is already burned with fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too hot, because the medicines of the ear cannot bear this.
Capitol .vii.	Seventh Chapter.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure of Impediment of Ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some times some children are born with the vents of their mothers unperforated, and this already happens to some men, impediment in the meat of the ear due to wound or flesh not being in that; and this impediment sometimes is made in the preone of the tract of the ear which does not follow the sense, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the preone of it, which does not comprehend the sense, is in the greater difficulties for difficult cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which comprehends the sense, it is necessary to pause the ear of the patient at the sun and look into it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if you see apparent oppression, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which there is a small latitude, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula be two lions wide so that it does not cause harm to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the impediment is due to flesh born in the ear or in the meat of it, then you should extract that with subtle onyx and incise it with great facility until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the impediment is in the preone of the ear, then take a subtle ray of lion and heat that with fire for a short time, and then place that in the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you have sensed oppression with that which the patient has discovered with facility, through gravity of air, force the oppression of it with facility; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then pause in the ear with cloth of linen according to the quantity of the breadth of the hole which you have wrapped around the Egyptian bandage; and make this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some oil and pour it into water and pulverize over it, and use it; and if the ear is already blackened, then it is necessary to extract the poultice and substitute it with another poultice which you will wrap in cloth soaked in rose oil, until the cauterized apostema yields; and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a flow of blood, then you should submerge a sponge or cloth in hot water and pause over the ear, and use another cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Eighth Chapter.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the Cure of Athazil Which Afflicts the Eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athazil which afflicts the eyelids of some people sometimes humid, and at other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore it is necessary to take those with tenhallas or onyx, and incise them with the spatula of their own roots, and then pause over the places as if sewn together.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain with bleeding comes, then you should cauterize those with a lanticular subtle cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to do it near the incisions and many times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Ninth Chapter.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of Grandeyss Which Afflicts the Eyelids of Men.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it happens that in the eyelids of men some cause arises which is akin to grandeyss in its strength and hardness, and therefore grandeyss is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of great humidity below and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the operation on them is that you should consider whether the grandeyss is proceeding from there in what appears to be from the eyelid and spreading to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore pour over that with a fissure by latitude, and then extract all of it from every part with facility until it evaporates, and then suspend that with an onyx and incise it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared to begin the incision of it unless you push through the eyelid with an incising instrument little by little, then this will not be noticed in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is little, then you will not suffer harm from it because the humor of it restores that and incarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the grandeyss is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid, then you should remove the surface outwardly; and then ease the eyelid and suspend the grandeyss with an onyx, unless you are obliged to incise it, and press that from every part; and if the eyelid by incision becomes lengthened, this will not be noticed in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and cure the place with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Tenth Chapter.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the Cure of Axirnah in the Eyelid above the Eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axirnah is a greyish substance which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and most commonly affects children, aggravates their eyes and causes great pain to them; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are shed upon them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore you should take those to weep over their faces all the time, and sleep on their faces; and so the eyelids of theirs above become humid, which have already been covered with inflammation, and the imminent danger is apparent in the eye; and when you press the place with those said remedies, you will bring forth an abscess within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some manner of operation is in that which the patient pauses his head over the said spot, and then pause cloth of linen on both sides and make a poultice, and make a circle according to the quantity contained by arthernach from every part; and then pause that over that and press with those said remedies so that an abscess may be aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then pour into the middle of that humid atmosphere with a spatula incised with a fissure by latitude, and the fissure not be greater than the one made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the beginning it is necessary to cut through all the cord until you reach the abscess, because in the most difficult processes abscesses are formed by fissure according to the form of white greyze.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the said remedies to the outer parts and roll back and forth between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure because with the spatula you may not reach the eye and thus damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if there is no abscess in the beginning of the fissure, but you adjust in the fissure a little with facility until the abscess processes; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of linen in water and vinegar, and apply them to the spot and stretch those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so some people that find salt apply it to the spot in the cavity of the fissure, so that this which remains of that humidity may be absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an apostema forms in the spot, then cure that with cauterizing poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Eleventh Chapter.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On Manners of Touching the Eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of men there are noted changes by adjusting below the natural lashes and so becoming antiquated, then those things do not pertain to the eye and make happen manners of illness thus as constant tears and softening of eyelids and skin until that becomes a cause of destruction of the eye which is called tactinir of the eye; and there are four cures: or by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization; or made by atactini through incision and suturing; or by cannas as you will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore it is necessary to pause the head of the patient in the said spot; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, good is; and otherwise, insert a needle into that part which is faithful from the outermost edge of the eyelid below the palpebra, and make the needle penetrate above, and thus be - near the margin of the palpebra in the place where there are no lashes - near the lashes, and pull the thread upwards to the parts above the palpebra, and convert it with a ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then pour into the outermost part of the eyelid below the lashes with a spatula incised with a lacrimal major thread to the lacrimal minor; and then extract the needle and pause below the eyelid, powdered with small amounts of cotton or cloth, and then send above the eyelid with a tent, and be thus like a figure of myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of heaviness of the eyelid, because this is diverse among men, because some of them require that a great amount of the eyelid be incised according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then pour with the spatula onto the two lines which you have drawn, and begin from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is like that near the natural lashes as is the greatest thickness of a king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onyx in one of the two angles of the cord, and then excoriate that entire thing, and then adjust with a stitch the two lips together with a subtle woolen thread or needle, and cleanse the blood, and cause to adhere what superfluous threads remain above the two eyelids with some causes being considered, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then loosen the stitch of the threads within three or four days, and then cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches, and cure that with what dries and constrains, because the eyelid is lifted by the sealing of the wound and the aggregation of it; but stitches are better. Therefore I say thus to the ancients who taxinate.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But however in that it is sought after by the patient, and is of good operation, and not in him fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manner in taxinating, and it is that you draw on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three separated and constricted threads according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to take the threads, and that is not equalized, then take a needle with thread and insert that into the middle of the figure, and then enter the other thread next to the lacrimal major, and the second thread next to the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the said remedies the threads with equality, and then raise with those your hand with equal elevation, raise all the cord above which is drawn as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an apostema forms because of your incision or your fissure, then take that apostema with a cauterizing agent and apply it to the area, and make it resemble a berry.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes it happens that the eyelid is converted so that its own lashes are turned into something else, then it is necessary to use in that what we have said about incision; but suturing in each case is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Atactinir with cannes is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and cut out the figure which is below according to what I have recounted; and then by art, make two cannes or two subtle astels of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the latitude of them is less than the latitude of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each party, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And then add each one with subtlety above what superfluous eyelid remains of the eye, and constrict the cannes of each party with a very tight stricture, and leave it for some days, because the cord through the stricture will die and become denatured and will settle into its place as soon as it is set free.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break off the thread and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the lashes do not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two cannes which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and latitude neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Twelfth Chapter.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On Lifting of Prickly Hairs on the Eye with a Needle when the Hair is Hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and prickly hairs on the eyes, then the operation in that is that you take a subtle needle and insert it into that thread of soft and white wool, and then adjust the extremities of it with great subtlety.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be of a quantity equal to one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another subtle thread below it in brief, and tie the extremities of that one if you wish to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in the said spot, and be near the sun so that your work may be declared, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair adjusted to the one that has required engineering, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair out above and insert it into alignment, and let there be one or two or three hairs and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with that until the hair is lifted out of alignment in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is lifted out of alignment and the hair is not lifted, then lift it to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until it is lifted out of alignment from above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then look at that with the vision of the eye, because you will lift it out of alignment and the thread, and grasp each one and lock the eye, and leave the lock for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows well on top of that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, then you adjust one long hair from the natural hairs, and it is lifted with that, or let it settle until it is lengthened to fit into some space, and then you lift that.
Capitol .xiii.	Thirteenth Chapter.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the Cure of Echacritation, which appears in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it appears in the eye echacritation, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its own direction, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this echacritation or is natural or accidental, and it is caused by consolidation of wound or sections or cauterizations, or by resemblance to their maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation in this case is that you break up that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of linen cloth between them, and tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary for you to use a cure on that of the causes which dry out and constrict; because if you do so, the echacritation will return worse than never before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that a cause that softens like fenugrec, and mix with the water in which they are cooked and sown with linseed, or with a yolk of egg, which is liquefied with some oil, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you open up with all artifice that is not consolidated according to the form in which it began.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is nothing but some correction of echacritation that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Fourteenth Chapter.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the Cure of Echacritation which is made in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This echacritation which is made in the eyelid below, which is indeed named truly echacritation; and it is of some natural, other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is made by wound or section or cauterization or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the parts above with the needle and cut it with the needle, and insert with a spatula wide.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should be, good is; and otherwise, take the thread and pause that in the cut figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close the two fissures on the left side of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two fissures be at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they converge, and let it be a done angle such that when they come together, it forms a figure of its own.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then hold back the flesh that way by the quantity that is the left side of it, below which the eyelid is.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separate parts and sew them together with a thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if echacritation occurs through a fissure or suture or cauterization, then you must make an incision with a flat fissure on the eyelashes of the eyelid as it was before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate it with a poultice between two lips, as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of echacritation when it is above or below, let it flow in that operation, according to its preparation in the form of echacritation, and that is in a form of various diversities.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan prepares artifice in every possible way that is possible to him, so that he can return the figure to its natural form, or nearly so, and that patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Fifteenth Chapter.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in many men, it is necessary that the eyelid be solidified more above than the album of the eye, and be prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore you must insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it with a needle.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you must insert the adhesion with a spatula that is not sharp like the incisions, having a little obtuseness so that the patient will not be disturbed by the operation, and leave the spatula that it will not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it will easily excise that adhesion so that the eyelid can return to its natural form and all the adhesion can be healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put into the eye salted water with which you wash; or distill upon it dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of wool, and pause above the eye lanolin infused into the albumen of egg, and then use for three days causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Sixteenth Chapter.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the Incision of the Nail and Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimals.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two manners, for either it is nervous, and resembles a hard, subtle cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed humidity, which when it touches iron, or is forced to take with an onyx, is abscinded and the onyx does not stick in place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the lacrimal major, which gradually becomes smaller as it covers the vision and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the manner of operating in this case is that the patient places his head in the said spot, and then you work on the eyes of him, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with an onyx of little duplication and stretch it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horse's hair or cow's hair or ox's hair, or something similar, or a strong thread, and double the extremity of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread; and stretch it to the parts above, and excise the hair on the side of the nail which touches the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will follow that with the hair into the last part of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you must incise the remaining part in the root of the lacrimal with a spatula or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal alone so that by incision of it there is no continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some days later the nail with the stretched onyx or thread, as we have said, and then it must be excised with a lion's spatula, whose form is this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the tunic of the cornea and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision gets in the eye a little bit of salted water or made from cypress to equalize it, and leave it for another day; and then cure that with what is necessary until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is the onyx stuck in it, then many times this species of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed like this, as you and I have recounted in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then you will work on the eye of the patient and take a spatula lion with a subtle edge, sharp like this:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes that is rarefied and becomes confused and enters into it, then you must distill from your hour on the eye of cypress made from siniar or with rosy eyes or with salted water, and anoint the eye until another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate on that the operation until all that is of it is remade, but not the contrary apostema that is in the eye, because you must leave it and cure at first the apostema until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the eye with great harm, is suspended with onyx; and incise that from one part, and do not finish the incision lest you excite a flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill on the lacrimal rosy eyes and made from siniar until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Seventeenth Chapter.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the Incision of Algae and Water Born from Flesh Adjusted in the Eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some people is born red flesh, and it is over-paused until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches above the eyelids and strongly compels the eyelids to be lifted towards the outer parts and is assembled like a rose on a balcony.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation in this case is that the patient places his head in the said spot; and then you work on the eyes of him and collect all that flesh with suitable onyxes and water, and take that with a forceps or with a casket; and then incise the flesh at first until everything is finished with the encisor, and beware of the eye that it does not scratch it as you perform your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And so your incision is with which you incise those or with spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is collected according to what will be the form of it, close to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that flesh is remade, then fill the eye with salted water, or distill upon it a red powder and similar to that of corrosive medicines, and pause above the eye outside, covered with albumen of egg, until you are assured of apostema's caution.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains some cause of algae and it is governed with caution, and you fear apostema's caution, then leave the eye alone and cure that apostema with water which causes that apostema to cease, and then iterate on that with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which occurs in the eye of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But nevertheless you must know that you should alienate all cure of the eye from natural or accidental means, work with iron, and not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member is sufficient for that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Eighteenth Chapter.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the Collection of Scales in the Eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Scales come forth red ones which are hardened on the eye and prohibit it from its natural operation, and uncover the eye in length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at first that you consider whether the eye in which there are scales is strong and in it there is no other disease than scales, then you must collect those scales.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place his head in the said spot, and then suspend those veins with one onyx or two according to your prudence; and that onyx of subtle duplication, as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onyxes gradually in one case, as follows:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then they are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wash away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins to be remade in the eye and turned around.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not scratch the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then you must distill on the eye green or red powder so that with its sharpness it corrodes the water which is remade from the scales.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this is not possible for you, then collect all in that hour, and afterwards apply all the water which relieves the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is calmed and you are assured of apostema's caution.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate on that according to the same manner, until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Nineteenth Chapter.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the Reduction of Swellings in the Nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure swellings with a cauter or sharp medicine, and they do not follow the narration of it and are not healed, then do not engage in it at all, but rather make incisions on the apostema until its maturity is reached, and extract all the moisture that is in it and pour it into it so that the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when the bone is uncovered and corruption or blackness appears in it, then you must scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called "aspre cap", and it is made of iron, and it has a red point on the top just like a cherry stone that is made pointed by lime or calkification through subtle punctation (just like it is in this form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And then pause that on the corrupt part of the bone, and gently rock it between the said points, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then make it some times, and afterwards restore the place with drying and stimulating causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the sickness has been excised and remains for 40 days, and does not renew itself and does not apostematize, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then there is no use in it but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover from below with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take a thread according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the handle of it be first exhausted until the extremity is just like that.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then pause that on the bone, and be it near to the lacrimal; and stretch out your hand a little from the eye, and then revolve your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient by sensation as if it were going to come out through that when you withdraw your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, then restore the place with stimulating and drying medicines, just as if it were a wound.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, since the flesh and the place are indurate, then the material which flowed to the outer parts returns to the nose, therefore this is more gentle on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Twentieth Chapter.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye eminence grows to its totality and does not cause harm or diminution, then you must loosen the patient, and afterwards follows, and pause for gentle breathing in the chest without scarification and suckle for good sucking; and then pause on the eye with a liniment made from catarrh, aloe, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the plaster over the eye with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's wool, and each cloth be duplicated into four folds; and make from those materials.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then pause on top of each other according to the quantity that the eye needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with a cloth of hard and strong fabric; and iterate the poultices with sucking without scarification; and then remove the poultices and leave the eye straight for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament is relaxed, then it is necessary to make it strong again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament at about day and night, just as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the eye is already reduced, well and good; but if not, then iterate the plaster with powders, and strength, and poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Twenty-First Chapter.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When endevous disrupcion occurs in the uveal tunic, and it is elevated and proceeds outside the eyelids just like a grain of mustard, and its shape resembles that of a man, and you want to incise it, then the operation in it is just as we have recounted, that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from the part left behind, and put the other needle into the double filament on the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the location of the double filament and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that much.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and pause on the eye with wool infused in egg white and leave it until the thread falls onto the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the eye with this water which comforts it, so that the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather from all parts with a circle of cloth into the eye adjusted to its great elevation, and then it is perforated by a subtle spatula which comes to the forefront of the eye, and flow the humectant albuginea, and descend the eye and enter soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Twenty-Second Chapter.
De curacio de alconati.	On the Cure of Alconitis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called alconatis is nothing but a humor that is adjusted in the eye, resembling descending water and not being so.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of working with it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight bed, and then take their head in your hands, grasping two parts, and make them look down until you see the humor come to the outer parts, and then dry it up and not let it flow, and be careful not to obstruct the light, and the patient sees the causes just as they see.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of the humor is not prepared with the water as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and find it on the panniculus cernent a small portion of the continuation of the conjunctiva on the cornea in the crown (up to the location you see), until the humor is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is forgotten, then you must distill on the eye cold water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then be cured with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Twenty-Second Chapter.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the Cure of the Water that Descends from the Eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable to be perforated by a declaration of sermon, then that one according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands on a mat and tie their own eye shut with a strong bandage.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then pause with your left hand near the eyelid of their own eye, if the eye in which the water is flowing is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take a small sponge, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then pause the extremity of the sponge near the crown by the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and then squeeze the sponge with force and revolve your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that the sponge has already reached the cause of the vision.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the sponge to the forefront be the measure of the space which is the size of the pupil from the beginning of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see through the pupil with the vision of the eye by the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then pause the sponge in the location where the water is, and then pull it down once or twice, and therefore if the water descends at once, you will see the patient's vision restored over which their sight had been impaired, and the sponge in their own eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, you will then lay that sponge down again before it is removed.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And therefore, when it is dry and does not descend, then you will extract the sponge with ease, and revolve your hand around it a little at a time, and then dissolve in the water a small amount of clear gemstone salt and with that wash the eye inside; and then pause outside the eye, coto or stopa or wool infused in rose oil and egg white, and tie the eye shut with water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we, those of our time, pause on that which is mixed with albumen in egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey your sponge in the instrument of the eye by its hardness - for some of the men whose eyes are very hard - then you must take the spatula which is called alberid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce with it that conjuncture, and do not leave your hand in the hole, but rather make a way for the sponge to enter the subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the sponge according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's bed for sleep, made in a dark and quiet room, where they will lie on their back, and be prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the natural state of it so that its nature is aligned, and not move their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligature be according to its disposition for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that in the darkest and most obscure place, and make the patient's vision free, and cause them to see some things, and then return the ligature on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary that you do this during the hours of treatment or shortly before infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They had to be careful because the water flows more quickly and strongly due to great and violent consideration.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if it happens that an abscess forms, then you must remove the eye before the seventh day, and correct it with water that will dissolve the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you must absolve the vision of him and pause on his face near the mouth for which it is governed, that he may be regulated in his excessiveness for some days, existing in the darkest place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually be freed from that dark place and converse with his own causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in all cases the disciple is not exempt from some vision at times, and then you must be bold over the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already been mentioned to us of some of those who are at the Artach, and some said that fire was made in the Ayrac, magnificently perforated in which the water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however you have not seen it done in our land which has perfected this, nor have you read about it in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magnificence by which one may be above those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or steel properly, and they are the extremities of their own form with this subtlety triangularly, the sharp end just like that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the Cure of Meat that has gone Bad in the Nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are born various meats, adjusted from which some cause is assembled like that of Scorpio's weight or Polyp's flesh; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that flesh represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it comes a cancerous, lapidated, and dark-colored meat; and from it comes the lion's flesh not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those that are not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and breathe through their nose, and pluck out the tumor from those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the outer parts, and then incise it with a sharp spatula of subtle instrumentality on one side until you know that all the meat has been removed; if there remains any cause by which abscess is possible, then you must ratify this with one of the subtle instruments with ease until no cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if the lord has an abscess or an apostema forms, then you must pause at that place which is necessary; or it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cut and cauterize it until the abscess is abscinded and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then be freed from the nose, near the incision, with water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and there is moisture processing into the palate, then you will know that it has already been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that behind it is meat gone bad in the pustules above the bones of the nose, to which abscess has not been absorbed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, it is necessary that you enter faithfully into the one with some thickness, and noise in the mouth noises, and pause between each noise the quantity of the said or less, and engender the patient and enter one extremity of the thread into the nose by means of the ray or another cause which is possible to him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And since this will have been done, that he attracts his own odor into the channels of the nose, and be exhaled on his gullet, for many times the resemblance to this action makes the children at school, and it is a light cause for him who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that goes out on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a seal of meat to the noises that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the meat is already absorbed by the noises of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the thread, and pause in the nose, near the abstraction of blood, a small quantity, and do this for three days or more until the engendered corrosion is completely consumed by what remains of the meat.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then in the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a lead canal for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you degenerate from the cure that exists, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to make a capipurge, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or iron, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small shell, and the metal similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed canal like a reed, and the canal of the instrument to make a capipurge maker should be flat, open; to which there is a handle at the end, with which you will take that when you need it in oil or water that you want from the juices and causes susceptible.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capipurgis are precious: recipe of foraging from castoreum, white bayberry, ginger, saffron, long pepper, escargot, and spice anaunc. And then mix with the juice of mulberry and cabbage, and make pills, and one pill be tempered with Tebezian water, and be given to the patient's nose sitting in the opposite direction.
Capitol .xxv.	Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the Worms Born in the Extremities of the Nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it is born a worm in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and increased over several days until one can see its regard.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore you must incise that in the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause over the place or cauterize or use medicine which is in location at that spot.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if it is delayed in its incision until it is magnified, then consider whether it is lapificated, hard, of dark color and little sentiment, then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times he who incises this apostema devotes great malice against him whom it had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apostema is of lion's touch and not of dark color, and it is possible to incise in all that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the location with what exists and constrain into until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the Suture of the Nose and Lips and Ear when Continuity is Dissolved by Wound or Similarity.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation unless in certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when it is necessary to adjust some cause of those, you must consider if it is fresh wound with the patient's blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and properly cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the continuity dissolution are already separated, and each is made whole, then you must excoriate each part of its apparent cord until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and over those powder blood of dragon and well mixed, and pause over the powder a poultice of definiçon, or of some other consolidative plaster, and bind that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace it with another plaster and bind that until the flesh is absorbed, and then cure with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you do and let it be known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the Extraction of those Causes that come in the two lips on the parties behind.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times it is necessary to take some men on the parties behind their lips, certain hard and similar to grass of errors, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lips and wounds of each of those hardnesses of all parts, and then fill the location with sagacious powder well mixed into which blood is restrained, and then be washed with wine and be cured in that place with what exists, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the Incision of the Adjusted Flesh in the Gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great many times, the flesh adjusted on the gums which the ancients called albulus, therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with a thread or tie it with the forfecs and incise that as its nature demands, and let the blood run out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then pause over the location with sagacious powder or other stiptic or excitatory powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, because the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth on the parties behind and those of the front and between the gums are adjusted rough, sharp, and some are blackened and are made citrines or green into which the gum goes by this corruption and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and pause the top of it in your own seat, and ratify the teeth in which those roughs and causes appear like sand into which no cause remains, and this will be done with respect to the blackness and citrinity and other things until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this is at the beginning of the reason, good; and otherwise, then you must iterate the reason over those to another day and to the second and to the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have needed many roots of diverse forms and figures according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore since the roots with which the tooth is rooted in the party behind are another of the roots with which it is rooted between teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots should be prepared by you as you will soon see:
Capitol .xxx.	Thirtieth Chapter.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Eradication of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and labor in total eradication of it, for there is no cause that can supply the need of it when it is eradicated, for it is a subtle substance into which an excuse is made in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But it is necessary that when the patient has been forced to eradicate that tooth, you must firmly certify which tooth is painful, for many times the pain deceives the patient and says it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and then the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of barberries.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you have certified which tooth is painful, and you know well, it is necessary that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, into which the tooth is dissolved from the gum of all parts, and then remove that with your own hands or with subtle forfexs little by little until that is conceived.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then take in hand strong and great for good speaking or sudden force, and pause the head of the patient between your fingers that hold it so well as not to cause pain, and then remove the tooth according to rectitude in manner that you do not break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and put that below the tooth from all parts with facility and effort to remove it in such a way as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is cracked or corroded, then it is necessary that you wrap a cloth around that crack and tighten it with the tip of a thin thread so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction on it while holding.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work exactly with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so as not to break it and leave a part behind, and return over the patient for the wickedness that may be greater than the first pain of him.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity over the eradication of their own, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to be broken than to be bound, and the roots of their removals all, or some of those, or that you extract that with some bones from the jawbone just as many times we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then wash the mouth with wine cold or wine hot and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is need of blood to flow thus, just as many times there is need, then take some quantity of vinegar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that vinegar does not conduce, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and subtle tongs with which the tooth is mauled at the beginning should be of long extra limb, short handle and thick, so that they are not folded when you must work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And be like times of thick handle so that when you strain with those they are not folded, have short extra limbs.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And be made of Indian iron with descending shapes of right extra limbs, and in the extra limbs of those there are teeth which some intrude into others and strain by construction descent strong, and sometimes the extra limbs of those have the shape of a bird's beak known as ciconia, so it is guarded, and are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Thirty-First Chapter.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Eradication of Teeth and Extraction of Bones from Masticated Mandibles.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must eradicate the tooth which is broken for some reason, it is necessary that you pause over the location with border for one day or two until the location is softened; and then enter algesti or tongs, the extra limbs of which are assembled like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their extra limbs are made behind like lime or almond.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your own eye with these forceps or tongs, it is necessary that you hollow out the root and scrape off all the flesh and enter the instrument which has no name, but is a small lever of this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it be of short extra limb, thick and small, and not curved so that it is not bent.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is forgotten, good it is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extra limb in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and with a thinner extra limb.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already you have helped yourself with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form, similar to the next one:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in shaving of teeth; for then it is made with this instrument which is assembled like once great, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extra limb bent or short, which has some thickness, and not curved so that it is not bent.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing you should know that the instruments of teeth are many and similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle craftsmen in their art find for themselves according to this what the operation means and the various diseases; because there are diseases to which the ancients did not know nor pause proper instruments, by the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or of other bones in the mouth is bent or twisted, then it is necessary to be very careful about that in its place where it is suitable for instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And be in that place some thickness little by little, and be strung or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and then restore the place with medicines suitable to this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then take away that from that fracture and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Thirty-Second Chapter.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the Care of Teeth Exceeding Over Others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are exalted and not according to their natural form, and more so when they pertain to women, and more so to venerable maidens; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth, and it is not possible for it to be sutured or bound together, then remove that; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it resembles a pig's jawbone, and is made of Indian iron with an extra limb very sharp.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And be your incision in which you incise that after many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that it is not like another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is an exalted tooth exposed to sharpening, then sharpen that with the Indian iron file of which this is the form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And be all of Indian iron and the edge smooth; and be with many small points like a file at which needles are made, at which the tooth is sharpened little by little in many days with ease, so that it is not another tooth like it and fouls.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then file that at the end, and sharpen that with some roots.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth whose part is bent and irritates the tongue, then it is necessary that you file that until the sharpness of that fracture is removed and smoothed out, and be full so that the tongue does not irritate nor the word corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Thirty-Third Chapter.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot hold on to that which is taken away, and you have cured it with stiptic medicines, and your cure has not been effective, then since it does not decay, take a gold wire and not silver, for silver turns green and in a few days becomes black, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And be the wire in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the form of the recipe is that you take the wire and take it double its length between two healthy teeth, and then increase it with two twists of the wire between two damaged ones, or if one or many, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then iterate the twisting until you reach the starting point again, and strengthen your work with ease and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And be the twisting in which you tighten the wire around the roots of the teeth so that they do not decay.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then incise the extra limbs of the wire that are superfluous with forceps or pincers, and add those in each place by gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave it as straight as Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another wire in such a way throughout its entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, tied together like these times.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two returns to its place, and are reunited as we have recounted, and remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only skilled craftsmen and wise ones can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable for some reason of cow bones, and is made from them like a tooth form, and is placed in the location where the tooth falls out, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the Incision of the Ligament which goes to the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which goes from the tongue sometimes or is natural to it which one has not, or accidental and occurs by a wound which is already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the patient, and lift up his tongue which exists within himself; and then incise that ligament nerve according to its latitude until the tongue is freed from its recent stiffness.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if in that place there is some hardness or nodulation, and it has been fixed by the consolidation of the wound, then you must use forceps and cut it along its latitude until you have cut through the ligament and dissolved the nodulation.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not a fissure made in the forehead of the flesh, and that you do not cut too deeply and bring forth a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the wound with lukewarm water or with hot and cold water in turns, and then pause so that the tongue may relax; thus is the manner in which the patient should leave his tongue relaxed every night so that it will not become consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is a flow of blood, pause over the location with a poultice made from vinegar; but if the blood flows, then immediately cauterize the location with a caustic lancet which is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that one and the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of a Ranula under the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes an abscess forms under the tongue, resembling a small tumor that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and it is greatly enlarged until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in it is that you open the patient's mouth, seated before the sun and consider the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of a dark or black color, hard and dry, which the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is turned white, which has moisture, then you should put the instrument in it, and incise that with a subtle spatula, and cut it from all sides; and if blood flows to you during your operation, then immediately pause above with a poultice made from vinegar, so as to stop the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have completed it as far as that place, and wash it with hot water and salt; and cure that one with the other cure, as is suitable for this, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the Extraction of Abscesses from both Ears and that which is nothing in the Gullet and other Abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess forms in the gullet, it is a glandular swelling that is assembled like a bunch of grapes, which then becomes inflamed and is called two ears; which when you cure them with what we have said in the division, but they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and has little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; rather let that abscess mature first, and then either you will break it or it will burst open by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, rough, and the root is subtle, then that abscess must be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already subsided and has become complete or if it has diminished by some diminution; and then make sure the patient stands before the sun, with his head in its natural position, and open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of the tongue between his own fingers, holding it with a noble instrument whose form is this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And be made of silver or iron, and be as subtle as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then, as you take hold of that tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and look at it with your own eyes, then take a small instrument and insert it into the abscess, and pull it out in all directions as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another cause that pulls some of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument whose form is this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is assembled like forceps, however the extra limbs of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the inward part of another, very sharp, made of Indian iron thoroughly blackened.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your presence, then cut it with a spatula whose form is this: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one incision, then cut the other one according to this same manner of cutting, and immediately apply a poultice made from vinegar to the patient's wound.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, apply water decoction of scorzonera or myrtle leaves and similar substances to the causes of stiptics until the bleeding is stopped, and then cure that one so that it may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there are other abscesses in the gullet besides those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said about cutting two incisions together.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her gullet, the abscess which was tending towards a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed up the gullet of hers, and the woman was breathing very tightly, and had already been forbidden from eating and drinking water, and was on the verge of death if you hadn't acted within a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so much that it had taken two days to go through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you cut yourself in half and remained stuck in one of the holes, and pulled it out, and there was a great piece torn off, and then you cut into the other hole, and immediately opened her mouth, and grasped her tongue, and then inserted the instrument into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you cut off a great part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So the gullet of that woman was completely cleared, and she began to drink water immediately, and then you prescribed food for her, therefore you did not cease cutting into that abscess many times over a long period, and subsequent abscesses formed in its place, which were cut into until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I went to the top and cauterized her gullet, so that there was no addition; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done with that woman.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the Incision of a Hovel when it is Abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh settles in the hovel and it is abscessed and long, then it is called a "perpendicular". And if it is on the left side, large and rounded, then it is called a "bubo".
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with the water we have said in the division, and your cure does not agree with it, and only sometimes that abscess has already become a cicatrix and is subtle, then you must cut into what is added to it and is rounded; and if it is at that length, and is sanguineous, dark-colored or black, and there is no sensation in it, then you must take care of the incision of it, because in that case there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you cut it according to the manner we have said of its whiteness and length, then you make sure the patient is seated and take hold of her tongue with an instrument whose form I have described, and place the instrument in the nose, and pull that down and cut it with one of the two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two abscesses.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not cut too much, but only as far as the natural term with no addition, because if you cut too much, you will damage his own speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then use the instrument that we have described in the incision of two abscesses, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is terrified by the incision, it is necessary to use an agent in the cauterization of him without fear, and the manner of the cautery on him is only with sharp water, and it is that you pause the head of the patient in its natural position, and immediately grasp his tongue with the instrument which we have described, and take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm it with living cause, and pause it not thick nor subtle, and fill up the concavity of the instrument whose form is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	So the extra limb of it is concave in which the medicine is placed like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient lies on his back so that the saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one flows into the intrinsically contained medicine, so that none of those causes descends upon the gullet of him and bothers it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take your hand and the medicine, and express it onto the uvula for a space of about an hour until you see that one becoming blackened and sedated by the biting action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a syringe above so that the cloth adheres to the canula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it be as is when it dries up and falls apart in three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then cauterize the abscess again in the circuit of the uvula with a cloth wrapped around it, and purify what is in the circuit of it with the medicine, and be washed with vinegar water, and be cured outside with an embrocation, and after that with poultices until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is safer than incision and longer in duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	And sometimes the uvula is cured in this way which is more subtle than cauterization and incision: take calament, hyssop, origanum, ruda, Arabic scicados, camomile, and similar herbs to those, and adjust all or some of these causes in a vessel, and be submerged in hot water, and boil; and the vessel should be well mixed with decent lye, and there should be a hole in the middle of the vessel, above which is placed an iron instrument according to this manner; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor can reach the uvula on the concha, until the uvula is quite obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this process many times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this cure at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, because it would be too strong for the abscess, and you must not do this, but rather wait for the declaration of the abscess to appear.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not at your presence, then take a cane and compose a bundle of hyacinth on the extremity of it, so that the mouth of the patient may be closed, because the bundle of hyacinth prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the Extraction of Thorns and that which adheres to the Gullet and other Causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times thorns or splinters from a fish or some other cause adhere to the gullet.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore it is necessary that you extract what is apparent from those thorns or splinters on which the sight falls, and then take hold of the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that to you it may be declared what is in the gullet.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the gullet, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach, because then the annexed cause of the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or give the patient a piece of nap or root of lettuce or a bottle of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then make the patient swallow that, so that as it goes to the place where the thorns are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take an eel and bind it tightly with thread, and set it aside for a moment, and then extract it; or take a pipe and insert it and then pull it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if those causes which we have said are not forgotten, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And be more thick than a ray, a little one, and in the extremity of it be concave which you will insert into his gullet with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let him raise his head upwards, and be careful that the touch of his skull on the gullet is avoided, so that it does not hurt the bone or thorn, or that he puts it into his own hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But meanwhile, let the patient himself insert it into his own gullet, by means of his knowledge of the location of the annexed cause and its descent below, and pull his hand with the instrument upwards, all according to the quantity which is prepared there until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Extraction of Sanguineous Matters Annexed to the Gullet.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the sanguineous matter is medicated with the water which we have said in the division of the cure by medicines and does not agree, then consider the gullet of the patient at sunrise, because you will have compressed the tongue of him with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you find the sanguineous matter, extract it with a small instrument or subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it by that means, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gullet of the patient, and place a hot iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this many times (until the sanguineous matter is dead and falls out of the gullet) and abstain from giving the patient water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vial full of vinegar water, and open the mouth of him in it, and wash his mouth with that; and do not give any other cause or harm to the patient an hour after, because the sanguineous matter soon as it feels the vinegar takes.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not forgotten according to what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or with assafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended for the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	And do this, until it is gone.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way of operation in suffumigation of that, which is that you take a vessel in which are hot coals and the vessel is covered with a covering in the middle of which is a hole; and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then place above the suffumigation; and hold the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has reached the sanguineous matter, because the sanguineous matter will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient water to drink, and make him eat salty causes and almonds, and do not give him vinegar water, and thus it is necessary that according to this regimen it will be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood and sanguineous matter are extracted from the gullet when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps like these, except that it has some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The one that is placed in the gullet, and its extremity is similar to the beak of a stork, which is guarded, in which lime is sharpened, so that when any cause is compressed, it will not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Fortieth Chapter.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon in warning against abscesses and in section on their treatment.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And thus diverse in perforation and section of them by two manners, one of which is by the species of abscesses themselves; and because they compress the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is proper to the locations in which accidents occur in the body, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess that occurs in a fleshy location is different from the abscess that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some abscesses are such that they should not be perforated, but rather allowed to mature with the pus in those or complete their natural course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses are such that they should be pierced when they are hard and not mature according to their natural course, like those that occur at joints. When an abscess occurs near a joint, it prolongs its presence within the circuit of the joint, and soon corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contractions in that member; or is an abscess near a main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it has matured to affect the main limb; or is near the anus, then pierce it unripe; and do not make it ripen through non-completion of digestion, but rather one that is proper to the anus, so that it does not protrude from there and be elongated towards the parts outside the anus, and become a fistula, or that it becomes in the term of life, not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is mature when the cessation of pain and the stopping of fever occur, and then the decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the tip of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when it is necessary to know that the perforation will occur in the location most distant from the abscess and from the coming of the cure for the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation should be done through the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in locations such as the lacertars, cords of nerves, arteries; and, finally, in all other locations where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to wait until the perforation of that one is confirmed through completion of digestion, as we have said; because if you perforate that before, it will prolong the body's suffering from that and many other impurities, and soon the lips of that place will be hardened and its depth will increase.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or body, as necessity requires, or according to that which the member demands.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses a great perforation and a wide or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are the abscesses in which it is necessary to concave and enclose the code, when it is done thus that it becomes like a pan and is finished in a term that has already stopped, just as those that occur in many cases of dubiosity and bubos.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are enclosed by section having three angles; and of those is one which is enclosed like the figure of a myrtle leaf, just as the abscesses of the gouters.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And among those are some in which round and lunated sections are administered, and resemble those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that one to which there is no such thing as abscesses like those of the lion, it is necessary to pierce that with a superficial or plane perforation only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you perforate that one and do not worry about extracting all the pus at once; having extracted one part, and then plug the abscess on another day, and then extract a larger part, and then do this many times according to graduation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And most of all if the patient is frail in virtue, or a woman in childbed, or a child in youth, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit many times is resolved by the exit of pus, and soon the patient dies, and you should not open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	So guard this chapter with great caution, and be careful in your perforation of these abscesses, for it is necessary to cleanse the wounds and consider therefore whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section; then you should administer some lint or old cloth; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is necessary that you pause and make each hole go together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess one part of the cord is cut off or you have concaved it in the circuit, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth or a thread made of linen fabric, just as when you drain pans or razors, removing their moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and then process it and cure it with water as needed from the compresses until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then you should administer vinegar water and apply it to the areas where the mule has a linen cloth, and pause that over the location of the bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and cure and apply powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in winter time, and the location of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then it is necessary that you wrap powders in vinegar and oil, and pause those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is necessary that you pause powders wrapped with water and oil or with vinegar and oil, and do everything cold until the third day, just as we have said, and then it is necessary to loosen the abscess and cleanse it and administer what is needed for its cure until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction that I have said about each abscess in how many ways it should be treated through chapters specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Forty-First Chapter.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of abscesses that occur in the cord of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cord of the head, small abscesses appear, and there are many species of nodes that contain tunics which are in their facts; and the species of them are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among these are pustules, and among those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among these are those that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling them; and among those that are lapidescent, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as you should not make the extraction of those that would cause contrariety to the arteries.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you introduce them with an instrument whose form is similar to this, which is called entromes, until you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if what is contained is moisture, then you should cut it with a section according to its length by superficial section in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begins at the section of the line from .B. to .G. Then when the moisture is evacuated, you should excoriate that part which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause there, because many times it returns if some cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that part with that liquid, and let it remain for another day, because by this means you will corrode all that remains of that peel.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then iterate on that cloth with Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly, if needed, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that peel; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and cut once between two lips of the section and scrape out all that part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your arteries are causing contrariety, then do what I have recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the abscess that is hardened through section and cure according to what we have said; and section on abscess that is hardened is less troublesome, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times there are certain ones of these abscesses which are in the head of some men who do not have moisture; the cause is that you cut into an abscess on the head of an old woman and crushed the abscess just like a deaf, harsh, white pustule, which could not be squeezed out, and if it was struck at by anyone, it would hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not like this chapter, just as those abscesses that come to the heads of children and need ear syringing, but the section of these all should be a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation in those from the lower part of them, so that the body may be relieved of the pus to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then cure those with what is needed for its cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Forty-Second Chapter.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and also in the armpits and in the groin area; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and many others that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is surrounded by its own tunic, and just as with nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are many, because some are hardened, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant ones that do not lend themselves to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find to be of good disposition in the Tocament, whose manifest color is related to the color of the cord, and is spread out in all parts, and not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and it does not push, then you should incise that one with a superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line from .G. to .B., and scrape out all of that part, and extend the two lips of the cord with one or many cuts if necessary, just as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be very sharp, so that it does not cut too deeply and adjust to your hand as you incise, or that it will trouble the patient, and that you do not cut into something that is not necessary to cut; because if you cut a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then pause in the wound with vitriol powder or other powders that stop bleeding, strengthen the wound, and let it remain until the abscess's acuteness subsides and the wound becomes softened and begins to be purged.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is evacuated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine the indications of your master said if there is any remaining cause of other small scrofulas, and incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of a large vein, then you should not incise that abscess from its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	And it is necessary to tie that one with a doubled thread, and let it remain until it falls of its own accord without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that abscess entirely, then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and stitch them together as soon as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the abscess, then it is necessary that you understand how to incise its root, and extract it and administer suturing and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofulas which contain moisture, perforate it with a superficial perforation at the location where you see the place of maturation of the pus, and pause in the perforation of that which is below the body, just as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the perforation with powder and ointment similar to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then, when you see the wound already cleansed, cure it with ointment of natural flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Forty-Third Chapter.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the pus of the abscess that occurs in the groin area.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients have described this section as an epilhot, and there is not one man in our land who has made it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those [ancient doctors].
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with varicose veins, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, because through this there is no benefit, since all the veins and main vessels of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses cutaneous on the mouth or groin area or two ears, when the disease is not in the cane [finger], it is necessary to use the section of epilhot to avoid the damage which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, it is necessary when we want to do this, that we incise the epilhot below three circles of the epilhot, or four with small section by latitude in that which is between two circles as much as possible, so that the section be in cartilage, not in bone, and this location is suitable for section, because it is bereft of flesh and the blood vessels are distant.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is hesitant, then it is necessary that he extend the cord of the groin area with one incision, and then cut the cord into the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the cipilach according to what we have recounted; and it is indicated on the section of the canal by the flame which is from that place and with water which is from there broken down and by the abscess of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is re-matured in which perforation is feared, add two lips to the cord of the wound, and stitch it alone except for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh heal until it is healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of this sermon which we have recounted is an exposition, and it is not just to see that some of those abscesses had already opened up the groin area of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the vital force has been exhausted, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the location of the wound through some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command to leave the wound open until the malevolence of the disease is consumed; and it is malevolent for three days; and then I command thus: close the wound, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a cauterizer and applied it to his groin area, and incised a part of the lung's cane, and you were called to cure him, and he was groaning like one who is dying, and I uncovered the wound and found the blood which had flowed from the wound small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore you were confessed that he had not incised a vein nor a nerve, and the breath was coming from the wound, and I cured it until it was completely healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And there was no accident to the servant except that he had difficulty in his voice, and then after some days he returned to improvement of his physical condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say to you that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Forty-Fourth Chapter.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on abscess which occurs in the groin area outside, and is called groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, named groin hernia, is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no remedy for healing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one resembles grassy nodes, and the other manner resembles an abscess made by the constriction of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to make presumptions about him except for one who is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then you should probe that and investigate it with the said, and if you find it resembling grassy nodes, and not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it as for nodes, and extract it with water which contains the peel and bursicles; and otherwise, then it is necessary to search out all his being, and then cure the location where it needs healing until it is healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Forty-Fifth Chapter.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on the kinds of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, many species and I have already said all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence, so as to avoid doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore you say that with excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of superfluity is stilled; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains the cartilage lion which is at one's own sac proper.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and it is made thus like a vessel, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, because either they are grassy and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, it is necessary that you expose it and inquire into it at its beginning with a stirrup which is called an intro-mus, according to what will be said in the chapter that is approaching this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, that you take this stirrup and insert it into the most humid location which you find in the abscess, and you rotate those little fingers with it gradually until you know that the stirrup has penetrated the cord.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then withdraw your finger according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the stirrup and observe what is situated in the vestige of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture that flows is forgotten, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the vestige of the intro-mus there is no moisture, then you should know that it is grass.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on it with a section having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	just as you have been taught, and suspend it with one incision, and excise the cord from all parts with ease, and preserve the peel or sac, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times there will be nothing left, and then you should extract it piece by piece until there is no remaining cause from it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains no cause, little or much, the node will return as before.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that there remains a small part of it, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, and strengthen the wound, and pause over that which has abscessed cautiously, and cure that other with another cure until it is healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the node is large, then you should stitch together its two lips and cure that with what it embodies.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse vein is opposite to it, or non-pulsating, then you should apply and rub the location with vinegar mixed with trisitium that is vitriol, and let it stay for two days or three until the wound is poulticed and the ebullition of blood subsides; and then return to incising what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Forty-Sixth Chapter.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those which are the forms of intro-mus, and there are three species, that one is great, and from it is half, and from it is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of great intro-mus is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of half intro-mus is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small intro-mus is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, with a rounded end and a curved tip, so that they can be inserted into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of instruments, and they are named "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three species, that one is great, half, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great instrument is this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of half instrument is this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of small instrument is this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So that they are suitable for those abscesses, excrescences, and fistulas, and buboes, because among these there are some of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, thick, and large like great needles with which the sewings are sewn, and they are made of lead citrine, or of lead, or of iron, or of silver. And the best ones are when they are made of lead citrine.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black lead instruments, which are suitable for those in which the fistulas open up in the conquest of which reflections are reflected, and which are reflected back into their own light with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three species, that one of them is long, and the others half-long, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of great instrument made of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of half-instrument made of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of small instrument made of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of knives are many species, that one is simple, which has only one curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and half.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And among them are some knife handles, and there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those, some knives have two curvatures, and there are three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them, some knives have three curvatures, and there are three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of great simple knife, form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of half-simple knife:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of small simple knife, form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of great handle knife:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of half-handle knife, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of small handle knife, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of great knife having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of half-knife having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of small knife having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of great knife having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of half-knife having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of small knife having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are sectioned and excised, and there are three species, that one is great, another half, and another small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of great scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of half-scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, nor are they paused in such a manner, but rather so that it may be done wisely in the excision of the nodes, the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and for that reason the patient should be healthy and have tranquility soon after the adjustment which is found to be necessary for the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of lancets, and there are three species: great, half, and small, just like needles.
La forma de magda gran:	Form of great lancet:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of half-lancet:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of small lancet:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of lead and resemble a ray, with which alcohol is distilled.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is at the extremity pointed with a hidden spatula and in that corner, there are passages outside and inside, when you want, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the teeth of the jaws of the abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and there are three species: great, half, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of aspirators with which the flow of blood is absorbed, and there are three species: great, half, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of lead citrine, rounded with some length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that you have these species of aspirators: great, half, and small, in order to absorb the flow of blood with speed in need, and afterwards when there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you should not use these to absorb blood in every part of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy areas, just as in the folds of the thighs and hips, and in the folds of the arms, breasts, belly, and groin, and similar to their fleshy parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some times they are made of those small instruments resembling scissors according to this form; by which the blood is absorbed when it is cut off by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some times they are made rounded according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Forty-Seventh Chapter.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of men's breasts which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of certain men become inflated when they start to be fat, and then the breasts become swollen, and similar to women's, and full of abscesses, far away.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to him who has this affliction, it is necessary that he incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then excise all the swelling, and then fill the wound with medicinal flesh, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suturing, and cure him until he is healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the folds and is softened by its magnitude, just like in women, then it should be cut into two parts, each containing a pus-filled cavity, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, where each section is contained within the other until the major line contains the minor one according to this form of the line from B to G. And then excise the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer what we have said about suturing and the powders that are necessary for the cure until he is healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which needs to be cut due to the anxiety of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a poultice submerged in corrosive vinegar and leave it until the corrosion is gone from the grayish discharge, and then cure him until he is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Forty-Eighth Chapter.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses that come from behind the titillate.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those abscesses that come from behind the titillate are of the species of scrofulae, hard ones, which contain a bag-like peel.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those abscesses some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the abscess, then you should fill it with a poultice and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the poultice should be stopped and cured with a suitable dressing, until he is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the species of nodes is, and of scrofulae, then you should cut on it just as we have said in the section on scrofulae equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended to such an extent that it becomes a poultice, then you should apply a cautery to it according to what we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Forty-Ninth Chapter.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of abscesses that occur by artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the cord is consolidated which is above it, many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it can be known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: because when the abscess is caused by the artery it is long and aggregated in the groin of the body; and when you palpate the abscess with those fingers, you feel a stridor there.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to the vein is round about the visible part of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this abscess is an error, and more so in those that are located near the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to avoid its cure with iron, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But on that which is caused by the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut along the cord section in the long direction; and then apply the section with scissors and then apply it to the artery, and deliver the tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put on the needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with a double thread in two places, which is what causes you to extract two arteries that are located in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then push the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is released and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer the cure in which fire is generated until the ligaments fall apart; and then cure that with suitable dressings to it, until he is healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is caused by a section of vein, then it is necessary for you to take with your hand as much water as is possible from the abscess and the cord, and then insert the needle behind the place which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract that from the other side, and then bind the abscess with a single ligament according to what I have said to you about the ligature of two parts with two extremities of a thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert a double thread with that needle behind all the abscess, and make the first incision of the needle, and strengthen those threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then cut the abscess in the middle of it, so that when what is inside it comes out, you will incise the excess of the cord, and leave what remains tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then stop on the poultice which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with some powders and dressings until he is healthy.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	First Chapter of the Abscess that occurs due to Torsion of Nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs through their percussion or occurs due to excessive fatigue, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made the most in the places of the assistants or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are damaged.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a grave abscess, and it is similar in color to the other flesh, and it is located in the places where there are major dispositions of the nerves, and when it is straitened with great vehemence, one feels in it as if the patient were stuporous.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the groin of the body, and therefore it is left alone, and he is damaged on all sides and does not go to the parties before or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore those that are in the joints should not be treated with iron, for fear that it would cause a contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But if it is in the head or forehead, then cut the cord with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then take that with forceps and excise that from the roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then suspend that with scissors, and excise that, and then stop that; and adjust the wound with suture, and cure that until he is healthy.
Capitol .li.	Fifty-First Chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the Section of Abscess which occurs in the Cheek that occurs in the Belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	I will describe to some men many times in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those which are called fungals by similarity to those with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head of that is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those who are small, and it is of those who are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and in the belly of it there were two fungi-like growths, which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with thin roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore you incise them and take away in one part what weighs 18 ounces. and the other part, which is 6 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider at first if the patient is humid, and the color of the abscess is white, humid, with thin roots; then you cut it with a spatula, and it should be in your presence before the fire, because many times the section of it will expel much blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient pale and trembling, beware of incision with iron; but take a thread of lead, freshly made, and tie it around that abscess, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it in the stricture of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly on that abscess until it is excised and falls apart through its own fatigue.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the abscess is of thick roots, then in the incision of it there may be some cause for fear and dread, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you excise most of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure him until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to excise the abscess which is of a foul color, with little sensation, and with no regard, for that is an absolute cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will come to the remembrance of cancer in this way.
Capitol .lii.	Fifty-Second Chapter.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the Cure for the Eminence of the Navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The Eminence of the Navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the cicatrix which is above the belly, and you see that it is a tear or bagging according to what develops in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from vein or artery as previously said, or by ventosity constricted in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the cicatrix and by bulging of the belly, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it will appear in diverse situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the belly, then the situation of that with water which we have recounted, is more violent and diverse, and as you apply that with those threads I said is hidden, and then returns; and soon after it appears in the same place, and is magnified much by the introduction of bathwater and violent labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to humidity, then there is no pain and it is not hidden when you apply with your hand, nor is it constricted or creased.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears declining towards blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to no flesh, then there is a grave, large, and hard abscess, and it is situated according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to ventosity, then the touch of it is painless.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider at first if the eminence of the navel is due to blood from artery, or vein, or ventosity; then it is necessary that you are forbidden from curing it, because in that case there is fear and dread, just as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by artery and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the navel is due to the belly or the cicatrix, then you must command the patient to take hold of his own ale and stand erect; and then send a servant into the circuit of all the navel, and command him to stand opposite between your two hands, and then surround with a spatula lat in the circuit of the navel over the place which has been indicated by the servant; and then extend most of the abscess to the upper parts with a large thread; and then tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or with a cord and do it decently.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then insert the middle of the abscess that has been extended over the ligament and introduce the said thread into it and ask for the belly; and if you have not found or guarded it by the ligament, then you will extract the remaining portion and push the belly towards the parts inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cicatrix, then take that with a thread; and cut away the excess from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that with force, and then return to your operation; take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and insert two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a cross shape, so that they will penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts above the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the place until the flesh extended falls away on its own; or cut that when it becomes soft and falls apart, and then cure it with water as needed for the dressings until he is healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence of the navel is due to no flesh or humidity in it, then you must conquer the abscess as we have said and remove the blood or humidity which you find there, and then cure it with water as needed and consolidate the place.
Capitol .liii.	Fifty-Third Chapter.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the Cure for Cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the type of cancer and how it is possible to cure it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid curing it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that cancer is generated by excessive and careless treatment of the wound.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, just like the one that is in the nipples or in the armpits and its similar appearance on the limbs assigned to remove all of it, and especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, you should not attempt to remove it, for I have not seen nor heard of anyone who has been able to cure such a cancer.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in it is when it is located as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge him of black cholera several times, and then sign him with the abscess if it is found full and manifest.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is located for the operation, and then prohibit him from using any thread or needle that could be used on him; and then concave all parts with a good suture so that there remains no cause for the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And then let the blood flow and do not absorb it slightly, and express the places, and wash away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find that the thick blood is obstructing the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it so that the flow of blood ceases, and then cure it with another treatment until he is healthy.
Capitol .liv.	Fifty-Fourth Chapter.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the Cure for Hydrocephalus.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, about the types of hydrocephalus caused by water and their signs, as well as the cure for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the type of hydrocephalus caused by dropsy alone, and it is not approached with iron to the type of tympanic meninges or to the type of hypochondriac, for that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this type of hydrocephalus caused by tympanic meninges with medicines and it does not improve your treatment, then consider this, for if the patient has already suffered debilitation, or is afflicted with another malady, such as dropsy in the chest or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not treat him with iron, for fear is above that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient full of virtue and abundance, and in him there is no other malady except for hydrocephalus alone, and not an infant nor an old man, then the method of the operation on him is that you lift the patient between your hands, and minister to him accordingly, expressing the belly with his own hand, filling the water at the departure from the penthouse, and take a spatula with spines according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	with two sharp edges long, with a sharp extremity just like a spatula; but however there should be some smallness in it little by little, so that in the operation on him it does not penetrate into the belly and cause harm to him.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydrocephalus is from one of the bellies, for then it is necessary that you, with the section, move away from the navel by three times the width of the said parts, on the right side of the belly above the penthouse.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocephalus is due to disease of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three times.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to biliousness, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary that your section be on the side where the patient intends to lie down, so that the excess fluids do not flow towards that location freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate with the instrument all the way through the cord, and then enter into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the cord and the siphon, and extract it; if it is about the length of a thumb or thereabouts.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the cicatrix until the spatula reaches the location where the water is, and it is the location of the fluid.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and enter with an instrument which has this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or of iron or of bronze lion, to which at the lower part of it is a small hole, and on both sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is cut off in the shape of a feather, as you see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the uppermost part of it is an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that armilla will immediately cover the instrument, so that it evacuates the water in the same moment, for if you evacuate more than what is needed at that hour, soon the patient will die from resolution of his animal spirit or else he will suffer a collapse which approaches death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate it according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what is signified by your observation of the patient's disposition from the pulse of it and from the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is caused by what is retained by the cord that retains the hole which is above the cicatrix of which I have recounted to you that it should be perforated in this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument to another day if you find that the patient can tolerate this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days on fear, and beware of error until there remains little water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and let out a great quantity of water, then cure him with burial in hot sand, and moisten his head with vinegar, and wait for a long time in the sun; and cure him with desiccative medicines until he is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the liver and gallbladder in accordance with the extraction of water as I have recounted above.
Capitol .lv.	Fifty-Fifth Chapter.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the Cure for Children Who are Born with Unperforated Urinary Tracts.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes one of the children is born with an unperforated urinary tract (or a narrow orifice that is not in its normal location).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the perforation as soon as they are born with a fine spatula in this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the orifice a small lead clip and tie it, and leave it for three days or four times.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when it is time to urinate, let it be restrained and hold back the urine; and then return that clip.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not close this opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that one whose orifice is narrow should be medicated with a lead clip as we have said, for several days until it is expanded.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the orifice is not in its normal location are led to this condition because of them, that which is born and comes out is blocked at the end of the urethra, so it cannot urinate into the lower parts, until it raises the urethra with his hand to the upper parts; and it is not a natural generation, therefore the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rightness, and it is a very bad illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation on him is that the patient should be positioned with his back against your left arm, and then extend the head of the urethra with your hand, using a violent extraction, and incise the head of the urethra at the location of the perineum with a sharp spatula, as it is done with a feather or by cutting out some part, so that the middle of him will be similar to the head of the urethra and the opening will fall in the middle place according to what is needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of bleeding, many times this happens; and pause then at the moment when you are going to cut the vein, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Fifty-Sixth Chapter.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the Abscess which occurs in the Prepuce at the head of the Urethra and of its Corruption, Negligence, and Adherence to the Head of the Urethra.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this abscess occurs in the urethra and is an eminence of bad flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these abscesses is malignant, and another is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, should be suspended with a fine thread and cut out completely; and then pause over that spot, anointing it with Egyptian ointment; and then, cure him with divine ointment until he is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, with a bad color, then you must administer a cauterization in the incision and reason of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the abscess is in the prepuce of the uncircumcised head of the urethra, and one part of it is inside the prepuce and another part is outside, then you must open up the abscess that is inside first, until it is consolidated; and then you will cure the one outside, because when you cure it together with the prepuce, there is no guarantee that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And then also comes corruption in the genitals and prepuce, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all this which has already been denigrated and which already wants to corrupt or which has already corrupted; and then apply a poultice on it with honey, which has been mixed with bran of millet and three-fold torn and crumbled.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure that with the other remedy until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is an excessive flow of blood, then administer a lunar cauterization in this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	for the juvenile cauterization is useful in two dispositions together, that is, in cases of bleeding and when the wound is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the urethra is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you must introduce a lead cannula into the meatus of the prepuce so that the patient may urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce with the head of the urethra (and this adhesion only occurs in one who is uncircumcised and has not undergone circumcision; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) it is necessary that you excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the urethra is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate those adhesions finely, then you must excise with a spatula some cause of the head of the urethra and prepuce, and thus it is because the prepuce, when it is subtle, is pierced through its subtlety lightly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the urethra with a thread of very fine silk, which has been soaked in water so that they do not stick together again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with a hot liquid until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Fifty-Seventh Chapter.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the Purification of Children and the Cure for what happens to those who are Circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds: but rather, it is an operation and will of ours, and theirs is properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and way, losing less of their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not say circumcision in any of their free books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which is why you have found the majority of craftsmen and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new razor and torre; and they use a thread with a needle and an incision with the finger.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already prohibited all these methods and did not find a better purification with razors, with thread on needle that is used in purification like the finger, because many times you will flee the cord above, because the cord of the prepuce has two tunics, and remains the tunic below, and soon it is forced to another incision and sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification made by the Alphabetic method, which is digital, used by barbers, is not ensured of the incision of the extremity of the male member, because it soon enters into the wound itself.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a finger, iron soon blunts and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it does not need purification in this way, and I have seen such cases.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the purification that is done with razors and threads on needle is discovered to me through experience, because the razors are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness above is as the sharpness below; and thus when you place your hand so proportionally two sharpnesses, and inscribe them according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the urethra from all sides, without making any mistake.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first method of operation is that you should make the child remain for a while, if it is one of those who understand a little, so that you do not do more than to lay the thread in his urethra just once, and then leave him until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make the child happy in all that way, as much as it is possible for him to receive his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make the child stay between your hands most carefully prepared, and not be at all surprised; and hide the razors in your hand or let them remain hidden from sight, so that the child does not see those nor anyone else of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the urethra and blow on the cord, and pull it so that the head of the urethra is reached, and then purify him from what has accumulated in the scrotum.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then bind the marked place with double thread, and then bind below that a small piece of thread as a second ligature, and then wet the said piece and indicate to you the location of the ligature left behind with good retention, and inscribe between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the cord slightly and extract the head of the urethra; and then let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and pause powdered above and on the powder pause a cloth in which is scattered the yolk of egg cooked in water with rose oil and vinegar; and leave that over him until the next day; and cure him with remedy until he is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the razors for purification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The razors are to be so shaped that the tips of the two outer ones should not cut and the other two should cut, in such a way that there is no gap between the handle of the claw, and the length of the two sharp parts should be as long as the length of two hands together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in purification is because soon the internal cord is completely removed or a part of it is left behind during incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you extend that part of the hour with your finger in front of the abscess on the location and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot keep it with your finger, then take that part with a thread and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the abscess on the urethra has not subsided, then you must let it be until the abscess is drained, and excise that part with facility, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the urethra, for it will not allow water to pass through.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore cure him with the water which consolidates the wounds, which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised by the cord according to measure, and obeys the parts above, then this will not cause harm to him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore cure him with the water that we have said until he is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Fifty-Eighth Chapter.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the Cure for Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made by pressure or by blood congested, or by pain or by inflammation, and it resembles those things that we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of it to be due to pain which is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient should be encouraged on his own dregs.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then press the patient's feet on his own back and stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back to his heels, and the patient should strain his arm as much as it is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, then the neck of the bladder is constricted to expel the pain towards the parts behind, so that the urine is absorbed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause is very violent upon the patient, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction of him with an instrument which is called syringe, the form of which is as follows: It should be made of silver and be subtle as a lion's claw, just like a bird's quill with subtlety of a ray long in similitude to half a palm, to which there should be a subtle thread at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of extracting urine with that is to take the doubled thread and place it at the extremity of the skin or wound for good adhesion; and then introduce the extremities of the thread into the part left behind of the urethra, and incise with razors if there is any superfluous cause of the skin, but instead insert it into the quill with vehemence. And then pour the ciringua with border and album of egg.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on a stool, and insert the quill into the urethra of him and the penis with oil of olive and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the quill with facility until it reaches the root of the penis; and then double the penis above at the part of the belly; and then push the quill into that; and then push that into the urethra, so that the patient is brought to the cause of his pain, and not done as such according to this order, but rather in the way that goes to tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then stretch the thread with the skin little by little, because the urine will dry out the skin.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then extract that and make it for urinary cure, and use the syringe, do not stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient receives relief.
Capitol .lix.	Nineteenth Chapter.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the Quality of Cathartization of the Bladder with Clamp-Crescent and similar instruments which are in accordance with this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood is congested in it, or it is constricted by pain, and you want to cause water and medicines to distill in it, then it should be made with an instrument which is called clamp-crescent, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at its extremity it is deaf, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that, there are three holes: two on one side, just like that sometimes.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it has a concave location, in which water is poured, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, except when some cause is taken from those humidities, it should be attracted, and when it is expelled, with water it should be attracted, and when it is long, according to what makes clamp-crescent like a naptha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to procure humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of clamp-crescent into the humidity, and attract with that water which is poured into the parts above, for the humidity is attracted in the concavity of clamp-crescent.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of clamp-crescent into the urethra according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then pour in the humidity with water that is poured, for that humidity will come to the bladder soon, and the patient will be cured.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the subtle syringe by which the bladder is cathartized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with its tip being similar to a small feather, and having a thread coming out from the ligature.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder of a living thing, and pause in it the humidity that you want to cathartize in the bladder, and then tie it between two with a strong ligature made of double thread, and heat up that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the syringe into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity and stricture descending until the patient is cured, because that humidity has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then take a pessary of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate that from all its roundness; and then insert a strong thread into those holes, just like they are revolved; and then add the circle just as it is added also to a futura, so that you pour in that water which you want of humidities, oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that into the instrument and make it just like you did with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Tenth Chapter.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of Extraction of Pain.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of pain and its cure by medicines, and the difference between pain generated in the lungs and pain generated in the bladder, and the signs of it.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said the pain which is caused by operation with hand and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the pain generated in the bladder properly is that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you are narrating that with a manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that the pain generated in the bladder mainly appears to children; and one of its signs is that the urine which comes out of the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and many times pees, and then it is dressed; and with this you will find the fault in the form of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to cure children from that until they have reached 14 years old; and it is difficult to cure the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is middling because it is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the pain is greater and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at first to purify the patient with a cathartic which extracts all the fissure that is in their intestines; for that fissure sometimes prevents the ascension of the pain caused by the investigation of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then it is necessary to press the patient with their own feet and be seated and mournful in order that the pain descends into the lower part of the bladder or jumps from one place to another at times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make him sit between your well-prepared hands, and those things of his are left behind, in order that the bladder is made to decline into the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then take it away and all that is outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the pain in space, then take a seat immediately with section upon it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not see the whole of the left hand's touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil your said indication of the left hand, whether the patient is a child or a young adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And take away the pain until it stays behind your said indication.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon it with your said indication, and eject that into the parts outside the location of which you are sectioning.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with their right hand; and command another minister to extend the big toe of their left foot towards the parts above, and with their other hand to relax the tendon which is below the big toe, in the part where the sectioning is being done.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatula which is incident to this, and this is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and split in it what is between the anus and the big toe, not in the middle location, but before the left side of the cleft; and be the section on that pain and your said indication is in the anus, and be made a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and slightly constricted according to the quantity that you have expelled from the pain, as much as possible, and not more, for fear that your said indication which is in the anus will be overcome by the pain of the section, and it will be forgotten without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from the pain there is some which has an angle and margin, so that the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that water is like a lion's claw, and is round, and is made for easier extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which has angles and margin, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus, then it is necessary that you guide over it, or strengthen over it with decent gestures, the extremity of which is like a file with which you strengthen on the pain, and do not remove from it; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot over it, then you should enlarge the hole a little bit, and if you see a flow of blood, cut in strength with nitric acid spread.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the pain is more than one, then at first you should press your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert on it; and then press a little bit further ahead; and similarly do so for several more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very great, then ignorance is that you insert that with a large section, for it will happen to the patient one of two causes: either death or a perpetual and continuous distillation of urine, therefore the location is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion from it until it is forgotten, or shape in the fracture of it with razors until that which is extracted comes out in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with the sap of aloe and the blood of dragon, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in roasted oil and water, so that the abscess may be softened.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then repose the patient on their own pillow, and do not release the bond for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been released, wash the wound with water and mild oil, and then cure it with divine ichor and devil's balsam until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there occurs an abscess that is caustic and corrosive, and it resembles as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known by the effluxion of blood with urine), then accordingly insert your said indication into the wound and extract that blood, for if left, it will provoke the bladder to corruption and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all species, according to what is needed for the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And it is necessary during all the hours of the cure that you lie and adjust both the cloths and the medicines which are paused over the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is small and is in the meat of the penis, and is fixed there, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then cure that with what you previously recommended before reaching section, for many times this cure is accused of section; and now I have tried it out, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron or bronze, whose form is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take thread, and tie it to that on the penis below the pain, so that it will not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the penis, piercing with ease until the perforator reaches that pain.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then revolve the perforator with your hand in that pain little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make that from one side penetrate to the other; for the urine will soon be released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is remaining of the pain of the part outside the penis, because it is tight and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits it from being done, then tie one thread below the pain and another thread above the pain.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then insert on top of the pain in that penis between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then release the ligature and purify the congealed blood which is found in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the pain, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread above, because when you release the thread near the extraction of the pain, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you lift the cord to the upper parts, or that you return to your previous statement, and close the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Tenth Chapter.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of Extraction of Pain from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pain in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you find pain in some of those [women], then the cure is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their reasons is that the woman is very virtuous.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you do not find a woman well skilled in discovering whether she has had carnal relations with a man when she is chaste, or is one of those women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you do not find a woman well skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth reason is that the location of the section on pain in women is far from the location of the pain, so you need a pre-natal section, and there is fear in it.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity demands it from you to this, then it is necessary that you take a woman who is well skilled and not easily frightened.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then look for one who is quiet and subtle, or present a mature woman well known in the way of women, or a woman who has separated from this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore present that one and command her to do everything you will tell her, from the investigation of the pain to the beginning; which reason is that she should examine if the woman is chaste, then it is necessary that she put her hand into the womb and seek out the pain.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find that one, cut her off below your said indication, and then command her to insert on top of that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not chaste, then command the matron to insert her hand into the woman's private parts and investigate on the pain, since she will pause her left hand over the bladder and compress it with a good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find that one, then it is necessary to gradually compress her from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts below with the sum of her virtue until she reaches the root of the cleft.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert on top of that the apposition of the majority of the private parts to the root of the cleft, whichever part is in front and center the pain in that part, and let it not be removed from the pain cut off below.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at first; and then insert the rule over that section, and if you feel the pain, adjust in section according to the quantity which you know will cause the pain to be released from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of pain are many: for some are small and great, and fierce and rough, and long and round, and have folds.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many species there are of it for that which you signify on what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust to the location nitric acid spread and tear it apart for one hour until the blood is stopped, and then return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the instruments which are said in the extraction of pain in men, so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the instrument inserted, then you pause powder on the location and strengthen it with poultices and strictures descending, and do not iterate this; and leave the pain alone and do not extract it, for fear that the patient may die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the sharpness of the blood has ceased after some days, and the location has cooled down, then you return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of Sectioning on an Acute Hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Acute hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which is below the cord of the genitourinary tract containing the urethra, and it is called ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper panniculus which nature has prepared in the part of the urethra, so that it is cut off as if it were another urethra; and it is the cord of the genitourinary tract between the white membrane which we have said, and not this but rather a tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which occurs in the genitourinary tract, so that it pours out this material into those parts, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow or impact made on the genitourinary tract.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors, for the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguine, or red, or is blackish-feculent, or white and watery, and this is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is are these: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then the abscess is rounded and declining a little towards length in such a figure as that of a urethra, and appears the genitourinary tract, because the moisture contains all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is rounded with a part of the urethra and people estimate that it is another urethra.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitourinary tract and the white membrane, then you cut below the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you test the color of the moisture in the abscess with a thread which is preceded by its form; and according to what it appears in the vestige of the thread, judge from that what it is destined for.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be bloodletting if this is possible for you, and sometimes fill his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then it should be elevated above the patient's back on some cause for a little while, and paused below with many cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the attendant to follow on the right side of him, which will extend his hand to one of two sides to the cord of the genitourinary tract and to the part of the womb.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and divide the cord of the genitourinary tract from the middle location to the length, just above the pubic arch.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And be made the section according to right and left evenly distant from the line that you should make on the skin of the genitourinary tract, until it reaches the white membrane comprehending.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And cut out that, and observe, and be careful not to insert it; and your excoriation with which you cut out by part below as if suspended on the urethra more and subtlety examine the excoriation according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the white membrane full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the white membrane to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the genitourinary tract comprehending, and insert the white membrane in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert that with its totality or in pieces, and more subtly the left side, for if you do not thoroughly examine the insertion of it, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the urethra proceeds from that outside of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white membrane, return back to it, and then adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitourinary tract with suturing, and then cure that just like the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the urethra corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate the vessels which are sore from the suspensory ligament, and extract the urethra, and then cure that with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you did with the other equally; and if it seems to be one operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should clean the blood, and enter into the sections the lanolin submerged in oil or rose-colored oil; and pause outside another lanolin which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two genitourinary tracts and the womb; and pause above cloths doubled and poultices, and bind them together with a ligament according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and then be pressed two cloths and be filled with lanolin kneaded according to this semblance; and be made the extremities with which it is necessary to bind with cotton or wet wool, and be attached with a strap in the waistband of the drawers, and one of the extremities takes from the tail to the thigh, and the second takes from the front of the pubic arch to the other side, and two extremities over two clefts below and two others over two angles, and all constriction be adjusted in the waistband of the drawers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cauterizer in place of sectioning with iron; and it is that you take a cauterizer cutlery subtle and insert it into the cord of the genitourinary tract, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white membrane containing the water is uncovered, and then you take the cauterizer according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is gathered in Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce the white membrane, and ignite until all the moisture is exhausted.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the white membrane with hooks, and excoriate with hooks, and excoriate with a subtle cauterizer ignited; and insert that according to what is possible for you until it radiates all of it; and be careful not to let the fire touch the urethra.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more safe and longer-lasting than the flow of blood, and better than an operation with sectioning.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if there is contradiction between abscess, sectioning or cauterization, or the flow of blood, then it is necessary that you cure what causes trouble to you in this way, with treatment which is suitable for him according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what we have recommended above; and it is when you are certain of this, by means of what we have said about significations, that that hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now it is necessary that you make the patient sit on some high stool, then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of him with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And be the opening wide enough to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then pause on the place cotton and bind that and leave it, in order that the remaining water may drain.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrariety is to the drainage of water in that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for this reason that the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound causes contrariety and prevents the efflux of water, then it is necessary that you put into the wound a pain or instrument with which the water is extracted from the drops, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opposite side of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and is accumulated for about 6 months or a little more; and when it is accumulated, then be pierced according to this manner, so that the patient will thus pass through his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Sectioning on a Fleshy Hernia and its Cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the sectioning of this hernia there is fear of losing one's life through great danger; therefore, to me it appears to be the dismissal of him and being saved by a better way.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are remembering the operation in that and the species of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses are formed in the bodies of those whose genitalia are composed and it is done so for many reasons: or by acute and sharp superfluity which is poured into the genitalia, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not found in him pain, and it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very rarely is it abscessed, the color of which is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by obstruction of the vessels, and by inflation of those things so that the memory of it is perceived, or by inflation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But this which is due to obstruction of the vessels is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you compress it with those things said; and it does not need that it be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But this which is caused by inflation of the vein is not dispersed from him due to any cause of compression with those things.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species a section be made and on the other flesh; and it is that you insert the cord of the genitourinary tract, and then stretch the urethra to the upper parts, and extract that from the white membrane, and free the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and tie them together, and insert the suspensory ligament more than you deliver that from all part of the parts of the urethra.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the urethra is already consolidated in those fleshly parts, then it is necessary that you extract the urethra and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the white membrane or between what is between the vessels, then it is necessary that you free all that adhesion and insert that by rounded insertion.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that is of him, and extract the urethra just as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose-colored oil and vinegar; and then cure that with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the Cure of a Hernia that is of the Womb.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The womb is an abscess enveloped by some envelope resembling a bud in softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this disease, fear is preceded by remembrance of it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary that we say operation in that according to what was done by the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to make the patient sit on a high stool; and then take hold of the suspensory ligament of the testicles at the lower parts; and then insert the cord of the genitourinary tract with those things said, into the vessels which are proved to be in the membrane; and have another minister than you, and extend it by extension vehement.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert with a spatula, sharp and thin, a transverse section in the right of the vessels, until the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excoriate from all parts just as we have said in the extraction of the vessels which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those a needle with a double thread, and tie it at the first of the places where the womb is located, and tie it again on the other side of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those in the middle location by right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated with the fetid and corrupted moistures.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with a cure for other wounds in which you want to be generated by so that the vessels which nourish one of two genitalia, because it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the womb is in all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles by this means are joined to the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the insertion of the vessels, and that they are atrophied, or that they become joined by so that they are not suitable for those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the Cure of an Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is due to a section that occurs in the gut extended on the belly of one side of the abdomen, so that the intestines bursting forth from that rupture fall into some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the gut or of excess from him, and it occurs in these two species due to many causes: or percussion, or by force, or by shouting, or by elevation of some great cause, or by similarities.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the gut, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess engendered in such a way that the gut compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is due to section of the gut, because at first it causes a sudden and vehement pain; and it is an abscess which appears differently from the beginning, with the cord apparently provided, and this is because of efflux of the intestine, and the body of him into the parts outside of the gut.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine, and it is called this intestinal hernia "cirbel".
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made with ventosity, and sometimes it runs into the intestine fissure, and there it is held, and it is there a great peril for the patient, and sometimes it causes a wicked and greater pain, especially when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of these species of this disease with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the caustic in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation for this is that you command the patient to pull out the intestine with his own hand into the parts outside of his conquered territory if he obeys the returnment, and then it should be inserted over his thigh between your thighs, and lift up the legs of him.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then straighten the cord which cuts off the cord of the testicles at the upper parts, and insert the cord of the testicles all along; and then place in two lips of the section hooks according to what is needed to open up the section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget about that from which the urethra is cut off.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise those membranes which are below the cord of the testicles, until the white hard membrane is uncovered from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you insert the thread said in this that cuts off the testicle, which is between the white membrane and the one below it, which is below the cord of the urethra, and between the second membrane, and absolve with that adherence that is behind the urethra.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then take the thread of the testicles and insert it into the parts outside, and with that extend the white membrane on both sides with your left hand, and lift up the urethra with the membrane to the point of the section; and command the minister to stretch the urethra upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search for those things said which will not be any cause of the intestine being enveloped in the white hard membrane.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find some cause from him, then you take that and tie it to the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle with a thread of thick fabric, made from 10 threads, and insert that at the last of the white membrane, which is below the cord of the testicles, where the section is; and then insert the extremities which emerge from the thread until there are four threads, and then shape some of them into figures in the manner of a cross; and tie with that the membrane of which we have said that it is below the cord of the testicles with very strong bonds of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the threads and tie those with a very strong bond, in such a way that some of the vessels which nourish those are not able to transmit any cause by which an abscess might be caused from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then pause another bond, according to the first bond, at a distance of more than three days; and then take those two bonds away from the membrane which is below the cord of the testicles, with the quantity of greatness equal to that said, and insert the remaining part in roundness, and stop the urethra.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert into the part below the cord of the testicles, through a section from which blood and pus flow, just as we have recounted in that which we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer lanolin immersed in oil, and pause on the wound; and administer the thread which we have recounted (and sometimes the white membrane is cauterized, which we have said should be inserted at the beginning to prevent bleeding, for many times those things occur) and leave the thread until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the bleeding is delayed, then take cold water and wrap it around, and pause on that until it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with another cure for wounds, until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	Of a Hernia of Ventosity.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there is no one who has been bold enough to undertake its cure with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is made just as we have recounted in the hernia which is with vinegar; which is that you tie the vessels close to the section over there with ease of him; and then cut off in the middle location around the abscess with this which obstructs it, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound according to what we have said, until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the Disproportion which is made in the Abdominals.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the abdominals just as we have said, and it protrudes the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not nourish the genitalia with any cause of the intestines to the genitalia; and if they do, it is little; and it returns again in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, there is a fissure formed in the membrane until it descends into the membrane; and this occurs because of the extension of the membrane which is in the abdominals just as we have said, which cause is that the membrane is stretched, and then it becomes soft and the location abscesses and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of this is with a cauterization just as we have previously recounted.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your thighs, and then cut off the location of the rupture of the abscesses protruding through a section by latitude, according to the quantity of three days.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white membrane that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and pause it on the protruding location of the membrane, and press it against the navel of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut the two protruding locations on the extremity of the ray of the membrane, and tie them together with a suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not insert it into the membrane entirely, nor extend the urethra, nor any other cause as you would have it be known in the cure of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the threads, cleanse that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the membrane is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this location, for it is more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it becomes fatigued from this.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who is treating this to make the patient lie on his back between your thighs, and insert all the softened cord which is placed over the natural cord; and then tie two lips with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened cord in three or four incisions, and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and then cure through the cure of other wounds, until it is healed and the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but because it was commanded to me that I remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary for the remembrance of it except by two ways, one of which is because this is in the science of a doctor when he is interrogated about it, knowing the cure for which it occurs; and the other way is that we have many times needed castration of other animals for our livestock purposes through these, just as with horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by emasculation, or by incision at the section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by emasculation, the way of the operation is that we make the animal lie down in cold water until its genitalia are softened and relaxed and hang loose.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand, into which they are resolved and do not appear to leave the touching.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspenders, and cut on each urethra with one section until two urethras process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those as much as you will have excised.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on the membrane of the cord, except for the subtle cord which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this manner of castration is better which is done by emasculation, because emasculation leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodism in men is according to two manners: one is when it appears in that space which is between the cord of testicles, in that place where there are two testicles, resembling a female form with breasts.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from that one urine flows which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, there is another species: and it is that the woman's vulva on the pubis is just like two male testicles, a little of everything, at the front part, just like the male perineum and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two of men and one species of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you must cut off those adjusted flesh parts until the impression of that is gone, and then cure those with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine flows that is in the cord of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of Lentiwing and Eminence of Flesh due to Causes of Women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lentiwing is very little adjusted over natural causes, until it is stretched and made to be a regular habit; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and pervades unto coition.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to take the excess of lentiwing with your hand or with a tool and cut it off.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not stop cutting until you reach the root of the reason, for fear that excessive bleeding may ensue.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure that with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrific part of the mare until it fills it, and very little is extracted to the front parts according to the likeness of a cock (and for this reason I will call this “bad birth disease”); therefore, it is necessary that we cut it off just like we cut off lentiwing, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the Cure of Alrication.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alrication is when the woman's vulva is not perforated, or is only slightly breached.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has preceded, and it is caused either by flesh not adjusted or by subtle cord or thickening.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the front of the mare, or in the sides of it, or in the uppermost part of it, or in the lowest part of it, and prohibits coition and pregnancy and childbirth, and very much prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of this is made by observation of the meter, if the opacity is apparent, it is taken as a sign; but if it is not apparent, then you should search for it with the said threads or with the ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the opacity is due to subtle cord, and it is attached to both lips, then you should cut and tear it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you pause on the two lips of flesh, and then pause the said threads indicating the signs of both masses at once.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then stretch both lips with force until that subtle cord is broken and the opacity is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take lanolin and mix it with oil and pause that on the location, and lie down at home for a day so that the cut location is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cord is thick and dense, then it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula or with mirta wood.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the opacity is due to fleshiness, then suspend that with a tool and cut it off.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use those medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as hakea, and dragon's blood, and enesis, adjusted with hen's egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad leaden cannula to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated slightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that in place for several days and administer lukewarm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural birth of other flesh, and it is necessary that you cut off according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to foul abscesses, then there should be no contrariness with iron in any manner against the foul abscesses that are in the mare.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids and Tail and Red Botch that occurs in the vulva of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are a great affliction of the orifices of many veins until those vessels corrode continuously and with time old hemorrhoids and their symptoms become worse.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have said in the division of those species and their signs, and I will say which ones receive cure and which ones do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and their symptoms when they are in the front part of the mare and do not appear with sensation, then in those there is no cure by iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifice of the mare and show sensation, are those that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and then stretch her tail with forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut off those things with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder on those the flows of blood from one of the cutting powders without biting, just like acaesis and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then warm her feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the blood flows persistently, then make that person sit in a decoction of senna and scorzonera and guaiacum and similar herbs.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make an ointment with water on the back of her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is stopped, it's good; and if not, make her adhere to two poultices, and on the nipples without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take lanolin and immerse that in the juice of colicandra or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarravier with vinegar, and make it adhere to the location; and then cure the location with a poultice until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But the tail which is of rough regardment, it is necessary that you cut off that which appears to be like that according to what I have said in the equalment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the Perforation of Accidental Fistula in the Mare.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of accidental abscesses occur in the mare, such as gangrene and lapidated abscess, ulcers, adhubilation, eruptive menopause, hemorrhoidal fistula, rugarius, and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and their species and signs, and the cures for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that you say in this treatise about the cauterized abscess which occurs in the mare when it is one of the abscesses that brings forth health, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the abscess in its initial stage is sharp with percussion and flux and fever, and if it blisters and if there is sensation on it, then do not cut open the abscess with perforation, but cure it with water that helps with maturation until the acuity of the accident subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then it is necessary that you make the woman lie down on a couch with two cushions; and recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part most distant from the belly, and her legs be expanded, and pause her arms behind her nails, and bind each one with a string to water.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow the right side and administer the instrument with which the orifice of the mare is opened, the shape of which will come in those causes that are about to be done.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And then it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you make it so that the ray of the front part of the mare of the woman goes into the instrument, and what enters the instrument from the mare does not go beyond the front part of the mare and does not hurt the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is greater than the front part of the mare, then it is necessary that you powder on the texture of the front part of the mare so that it prohibits the entrance of any instrument into the front part of the mare.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And then it is necessary that you powder the pivot which runs in the instrument on the right side and above, and that the minister hold the instrument and turn the pivot until the orifice of the mare is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears, and it is touched with the hand and is warm and moist, then it is necessary that you cut off what is above the head of it with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you put in the wound a poultice submerged in rose oil or green oil which has some purifying properties; and pause the pressure in the section of the front part of the mare.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then pause before the mare and on the pentimento lanolin submerged in water which has been boiled with mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then be cured after two days with an ointment which corresponds to the water until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the mare is washed and the wound with this mixture that is clarified with water and honey, and then with water in which the root of lily or of Aristolochia longa has been boiled, and then returns to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the mare with pus, then it is necessary that you are prohibited from cutting into it with iron, having cured it with water as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner they should be medicated when they are sick according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should know at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by signs from it, and that when you see the woman expel the afterbirth with ease and desire to smell the air, and on top of that is relaxed due to what is coming out of her part, and hasten the descent of the embryo, then you should know that this part is according to natural figure, and is the descent of it onto its head, and the second stage is with that or suspended or pendulous from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, since you see those signs, it is necessary that the belly of her be compressed so that the embryo descends slightly when they descend onto its head, and then comes out the second stage, and is cleaned of those superfluidities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another this part is unnatural and not feasible, for when the embryo is descended onto its feet and her body is descended before her head and her feet, and one hand or at her foot .i., or is descended the head of her and one hand or at her belly, and very much is turned towards her back, and similar to the figures that are not feasible.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to keep herself from error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you show all the figure of those, and what engineer is in them so that it may be signified by this and has stood on this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is placed on its head by natural excretion, and that is vehement upon the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it is already weakened, then make her sit down or lie down with ease, and evaporate the vulva of her with fenugreek coitus and with warm oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the finger of the midwife between her said spatula and crevice with that the second stage, or cut it off at its own nail until the moisture flows forth which is in her.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be clarified with pellitory mucilage and fenugreek mucilage with vinegar.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it to her, and command the clarification that be compressed and make her sneeze with conditions; and tie her mouth and nose of her for one hour, because the fetus will soon forget.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two membranes of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with small pieces of facilitation little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then pause the woman on a couch and lift her feet up, and then conceive the couch on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall with the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the membranes are not turned back and the fetus dies, then cut them open and extract the placenta of the fetus or tie the body to her hand with cloth and extract it with equality, because that will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The descent of the embryo onto its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is placed on its feet, then it is necessary that you encourage those in place, and then turn the small fetus around, and then make it equal to the previous one, and then take one foot of her and stretch them out little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are placed into the legs, then you command her to push, and make her sneeze with conditions, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then you return the small fetus little by little until it pauses according to natural figure, because that will soon be forgotten with easier descent.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited with all that we have recounted, then take the mucilage of althea and dissolved gum, and strike it well in the mortar for good striking, and then line it up with water the vulva of the woman, at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that to cease in hot water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when times that the afterbirth of her are relaxed, then make her sub-fumigation with myrtle and sub-pause it to her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigation lasts for an hour, then make her sit down on a couch, and make her sneeze and stretch out her mouth, and lift it away from her, and press the lower part of her belly with gentle compression, because the fetus will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Descent of the fetus onto its nails and membranes.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus has descended in this form, then you gently introduce its membranes little by little; and then the woman lies down on her back, with her feet hanging down, and those membranes are just above the light, and complete the membranes.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on her belly little by little, and then extract what is left from her feet into the ears until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forgotten, then take her feet and move them with strong movement, and press on what is above the hypochondria little by little until the fetus can push into the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert her membranes and equalize the fetus little by little, and command the woman to push until the fetus is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Descent of the fetus laterally pending one of its membranes.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Let it be reduced by the hand of her, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and strike the legs of her with strong concussion, and then administer the remedies which you have recounted to us in mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has come, then make her sit down on a couch, and then study the reduction of the arm, and equalize the fetus according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Descent of the fetus onto the back, with its membranes expanded and the woman's face to her right side.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife has the hand of the fetus and then turns it little by little, and makes it equal with facility.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized and the time comes, then pause over the vulva of her with what we have recounted of oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to push little by little, and when you have finished that, make her sit down on a couch and command her to lean over the right side, and then command her to compress; and make her sneeze with conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the prepared fetus onto the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it comes out of the mother's horror according to this manner, consider, and then you cut open the second stage with your finger until it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over her face and back, then you cut open that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the afterbirth until it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and it will soon be forgotten with easier descent, if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that sometimes twins are born, and sometimes not even three or four, but this is strange and does not come about naturally. But there are causes that are against nature, and they do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And with these [twins], whether they are multiple or single, one second stage, and they are separated by the navel, distinguish them into individual ligaments in each of those. And sometimes they are forgotten like this, as if it were just one fetus descending naturally easier, and sometimes they are seen like this, not feasible like we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you treat them like we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does that which makes for facility and subtlety, and with delay, and is ingenious according to all figures, as it is prepared by nature leading to salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos and those that are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are found to be fertile with one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten children, and it is necessary for me to verify that a woman has given birth to six and another to ten in total, which was caused by the measurement of the wise ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is necessary in the science of the midwife, because it comes to that which seems like a small matter to her, and therefore pause in that with what is needed.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled outside, and you are forced to use an operation with hand, then it is necessary that you consider whether the woman has sound virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents whereby loss of life is feared upon her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman be laid down on her back on her shoulders, and her head inclined downwards and her legs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister hold that in two parts or be tied on her back so that her body does not extend excessively during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the mother with warm oil, and with mucilage of althea and fenugreek and seed of lily.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife puts her hand on the mother's abdomen with those oils and mucilages, and then inserts her hand with facility into the mother, and then searches for the exact place where the fingers should be inserted into the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And finds the convenient place in this: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head, and then you make your fingers enter into one of these places: into the ears, or into the back, or into the mouth, or into the palate, or under the beard, or into the furrow, or into the proper places of the ribs, or into the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is onto her feet, then in the pterygium or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to have the finger of her right hand, and pause the curvature of her in that place which is between the fingers of her left hand, and insert the hand with facility and make the finger enter into one of those places which we have said, until it reaches the cause of childbirth.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and make another finger or the third if necessary, in order to be an equal attraction, and not an extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus it is good at all parts, because the descent of her will be alleviated as it is done in denture by the eradication of the fetus.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And thus it is necessary in her that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if some part of her is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint certain fingers with oil and insert those skillfully and revolve with what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers should be pushed into a location that is higher up; and make it so until the entire fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is stuck in front of the other and it is not possible to reduce that by the constriction of her, then it is necessary for a cloth to be wrapped around it; and then extract it until all is forgotten, and cut it open either at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it is necessary to do the same in the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or if constriction occurs during delivery, or if water is adjusted in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a spatula with spines and cut open the head and extract the water, or use an instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come from the forms of other instruments in the chapter that is appropriate for this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the fetus is naturally large-headed: and then it is necessary to cut open that with an instrument called "algematu", or take it with an "alundat" as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is extracted and constricted at the furrow, then it is necessary to cut open into where the humidity which is in the feet is poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated nor follows the descent, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the afterbirth is apostematous or is in a watery state, then it is necessary to perforate that until the humidity which is in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted at the belly and feet, then it is necessary to extract that with cloth which you will wrap around your hand, and cut open the belly and feet until the water that is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are obstructed and the head turns back, then enter the left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is swollen, then enter the right hand into the prepuce of the lute, and seek out that head, and attract it with those fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers and attract her to them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted due to apostema which happens to one, then it is not necessary to trouble about it; before all, it is necessary to administer an effusion of humid and fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible it is, be punctured: and administer what we have said about a living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then cut into the membranes and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that no cause remains behind in the second stage.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for apostemas which occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then let it flow into stiptic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and then on that same spot another pregnancy had been undertaken, and then the dead fetus is the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to one that a long time ago an apostema occurred in her navel; and it swelled up until it became a tumor, and began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called upon to cure her, and treated her for a long time, but the wound was not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you applied to her some poultices of strong attraction, and extracted from her a bone, and then after a few days, another bone was extracted; and you were very astonished, because in the belly there was no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you cleansed the wound and extracted from it many bones, the woman existing in her own milk deposits, and already living in such a way for a long time, bore from it a small amount of pus.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you did not think it strange, but rather because in this is science and aid to what the physician artist administers with his hand for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of a vice-like shape in which the mother is opened up:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which are equalized the ligaments, at which equalization are two vices on two extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this vice should be more subtle and made of ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each stick should be two fingers and the edge of each one a single finger; and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of the two sticks are two adjustments of those same sticks which are already fixed, from which the length is slightly less than one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with them when you revolve the two prescribed vices.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it are two additions like times, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then you make the woman sit down on her back, and open what is between the thighs of hers.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then place your hand with the instrument as you would with forceps, equalizing according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother until it makes what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vice which they called in the olden days:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impulse with which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of amputation with which the large head is cut off.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps with which there are teeth at the end, like times, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like times, with which there are teeth like the teeth of a saw that is inserted and cut.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of little amputation:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of finger having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of finger having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with which there are teeth like a saw, with which the head of the fetus is cut.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two handles with which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when even more species of that and they are prepared by the artisans, as soon as it is easier to their operation and more abundant for humans in its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you must not neglect any of those instruments whatsoever, since the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On the extraction of the placenta.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the placenta is retained after delivery, then you must command the patient to strain their bladder and appropriate make that stornudar with conditions, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of it and on the nostrils of it, and if by so it has been extracted, good is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a cloth and pierce a hole in the cover and pause on that herb which opens up the mouth of the mother, such as calamus and rue and anise and camomile and Arabic squill and cinnamon.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause that on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then put a reed cane into the mouth of the mother, and keep it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that stornudar as we have said, and the placenta will be extracted with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure does not work and the placenta remains, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or a mucilage of althea, and then insert that into the womb and seek out the placenta, and when you have found it, take it and extract it little by little. But if it is annexed to the back of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the placenta, extract it little by little following the natural order so that the mother does not faint from excessive attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before all, it is necessary to be well-established on both right and left sides with facility.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust yourself in the quantity of attraction, for it will obey and escape from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with straining and medication by the cloth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not extracted with all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful that you do not force it on her in iteration of abstraction, but rather ensure that what has come out from her to the mouth of the mother lies on the back of the woman, and then cover it with a cloth and tetrafarmacal; for that will make it rot away after some days and be dissolved and extracted.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots away, it rises to bad humor in the head and stomach, and this leads to the patient's illness; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered accordingly.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already tried sub-fumigation with nutmeg and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated for retention of menstruation and placenta:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of birch or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And it is paused with the subtle extremity in the womb and the broad extremity on the fire, and the sub-fumigation is paused above the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that in until that sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the cure of the child's unperforated navel.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born without navels, and their bellies are not perforated, which are now covered with a subtle and opaque membrane.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife pierce that membrane with her finger, and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the lacrimal gland.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply a poultice on that wound with wool saturated in wine and oil, and then cure it with a cloth until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may be blocked, then insert a reed into the wound for many days, and remove it when the child wants to urinate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And already occurs obstruction of the navel due to consolidation of the wound or apostema; then it is necessary that this consolidation be cut out, and then cure it with the water we have said about the cure and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the cure of the fistulas that are left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that remain after the birth, lower down near the navel and thicker ones which are left near the outside of the navel or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a single fistula or multiple.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when this nodule is aged and comes forth with white or subtle pus, and sometimes some of these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that are penetrating are known by what comes out of them through the egress and windiness; and sometimes the patient uses the egress, and then a great deal of blood is discharged from those.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas sometimes penetrate into the space and enter the bladder, and enter the urethra of the penis; and some of those that penetrate enter the junction of the back and enter the notch of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And it is known by what comes out of a penetrating or non-penetrating fistula that you put your finger in the navel and then gently probe with a subtle instrument made of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no blockage.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is blockage in that, then insert a subtle instrument made of lead or the hide of a horse into it until you feel the instrument or the hide at the navel.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you don't feel that at all or there is no discharge of any kind, whether blood, pus, or wind, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or urethra of the penis, then know that its significance is discharged through urine and prohibition of further discharge at this point so that the location may be consolidated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the junction of the back or bone and causing pain in the circuit, then know that its signification is that the probe enters here if there is no blockage into the bone, and causing pain in the circuit of the side; and that from there is discharge always; and that it is not good in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with a cloth.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of these is the labor and patience of skilled physicians on which they are fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not aged, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I have recommended to you, and what has already been proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your legs over their own thighs and lifts up their knees to theirs, so that their backs are inclined towards their belly; and then insert a lead probe or one made of steel if there is blockage in the fistula, until you know the location where the probe pierces.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels pain around the navel, then have you insert your finger into the navel.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already been discovered to be penetrating, or on the other hand you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not trouble yourself with it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But others will say that some are cured in certain men's hands.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which one hopes for a good outcome in that is that you apply a subtle cauterizing fire according to the size of the fistula, as has been said before, and then insert that ignited substance into the fistula until it reaches around the navel; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted fleshy folds are adapted, which resemble the quill of an eagle.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that with wraps of cloth in butter until all those fleshy folds are softened and consolidated, and if it is healed, good is; but if not, then know that it will not be cured in any time through another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate into that which is in the navel, but instead between that and the probe which is a layer of flesh or membrane, and sometimes the fistula opens up to the surface of the codenna, then dry up the codenna from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and be in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the probe is, and through the probe is liberated and cleansed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fleshy folds which are gathered like the quill of an eagle and do not remain any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is bleeding when you are cleaning those fleshy folds, then take the milk which is and of the pus's easier instrument, cauterize with fire or acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: so it is adjustment of those adjusted fleshy folds, and abscission of blood excessive from humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that with wraps of cloth or coarse thread wrapped around the wound until it becomes firm and dry, and then apply a poultice made from hard flesh which generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines in which there is astringency and excess; when that has been restored, it is already healed and you do not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has pierced into the navel of the abdomen and is elongated from its surface to the body, then insert your finger into the navel and ask about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you find the probe and it is between you and her, and it is suddenly of membrane or flesh, and it is inclined towards penetration, then there is no operation in that place except according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in that place one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry up the wound until you achieve the conquest of the area so that it becomes possible for you to insert the instruments and the proper cure; and not proceed with the drying process so that the lacrimal gland contained in the navel is not disturbed, and what happens is according to the patient's will; and then apply the remedy as we have said, for it is likely that the wound will be healed; or to lengthen the membrane and remove the pus that has accumulated in the area, as we have said, with a sharp instrument or another instrument of acute extremity, and then clean those fleshy folds which are in the section where you can see the pericrustation; and then make an effort to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open on one side of the navel, and it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is ended in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the navel around the surface of the body with the codenna and on the margin of the navel, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle prepared to pierce through according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert into that faithful wrap of five or seven, and then insert the probe wrapped in it into the fistula until you achieve the conquest of the area.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrating in the margin of the navel, then you take out the thread from that hole and insert your finger into the navel; and pull out the extremity of the thread and adjust both ends together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or two, and when more often you introduce the thread into the flesh, strengthen it until those fleshy folds which are between the two ends of the thread are separated.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, but not into the navel, for it is not for you to do so that you do not disturb the lacrimal gland; and then make it so that it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatulum with which the fistula is pierced: its curvature is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so that you do not disturb what is not necessary, just as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the insertion of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are in two ways, because either they are between the navel resembling as if they were of charcoal, or those that are like a bunch of grapes.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them always and is one, and many, and outside the navel, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are outside the navel are according to the months of little humidity, from which a yellowish water or a small amount of blood flows with continuous bleeding, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is outside the navel is that you command the patient to settle and to evacuate into the navel, so that it may be cleansed and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take hold of them and suspend with hooks or what you have at your finger's end, and then insert those into the very roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the hooks are not taken hold of in those due to their humidity and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or with a piece of cord or with woolen flax, and pull out those with your fingers, and then insert those and sprinkle some powders that are suitable for cauterization over them, so that they may be adapted to the area; or cauterize those as is described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other remedy until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the navel does not obey evacuation, then bind the patient with a binding that has a small biting point, and wash it with water from the navel and it will obey evacuation slightly when the patient is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the navel, then the cause of theirs is slight, and it is that you take them with your finger or with hooks, and insert them, and then cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And the one who will perform the suturing, must minister suturing to them according to this manner: take a thread wrapped and insert it into an needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that thread penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the thread in the part farthest from the needle, and so laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and then remove the needle and thread.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one and not cauterize it, so that the excess blood will flow from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then pause over the navel, wrapping it with cloth soaked in red oil or cerote; and pause that on the navel and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it alone until it is closed; and when it is closed, cure those with herbs or another remedy until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	The Cure of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times it happens through excessive division or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are ancient and not good with that medicine, then you must take those away with the point of a spatula or your finger until they are made moist and the discharge above is hosted, which prohibits those from consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must take those away with reason more vehement than the first time until much blood flows and they are excoriated; and then cure those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The Cure of Hemorrhoids: this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that hemorrhoids are the key, and not just notes around according to the color of the skin resembling a head of clover, and it is made in all the body and most especially in the parts left behind the weights and the said ones, and entwined by those pains you will know the meaning.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to be inserted into the circuit of the key, and to be held with forceps or hooks, and to be eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is described in its own chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But in truth, warts are small, hard, and round bumps on the surface of the body, and many times they appear on the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for it is that you stretch and insert it, or that you strengthen it with a thread or skin until it closes.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And then they are eradicated forwards and backwards with the instrument that you will say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a mole is a small, fatty or fistulous prominence on the surface of the body that appears like a bite from a worm, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a needle from an eagle or a vulture, and it should be strong, and pause it on the mole until it contains the circle of the needle in the parts of it; and then revolve your hand with the needle until you insert what is in the circuit of the mole, and pause it in the flesh of the skin, and that eradiques the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make it with a needle of iron or steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	So the upper part of the needle is pulled out with subtlety, softly (it is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that above it the skin's learning is abolished and the revolution of that one.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the mole according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The Form of the Instruments Which Are Administered to Give Binding.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times it is made binding of silver or lead or melted iron or malletted; and some times it is made from those small and large instruments according to those with which they are administered, for that which is administered in the care of small children should be small; and as for those whose behinds are freckled or dolorous, their bindings should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The Form of Great Binding and Little.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle above, in which the pouch is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the pouch is tied, just as sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the navel, should be soft (it is not opened) like a lion's mouth, going back to subtlety; and on one side there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and its width should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker than small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch should be in which medicines of vescera of beast or of wool of sheep are placed, and the root of it is one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with many small holes just as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes is the thickness of that.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those holes a strong thread of pure linen, which is made of ten threads, or surround them with it; and adjust the pouch to that point; and when the pouch is placed in it, be stretched in the head of the binding between two distinct parts with strong constriction, and then bind each hole: But the quality of binding at that time is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and take care that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be laid on their back, and raise their knees up high and pause above that point one foot over which men or a lance is placed; and then bring the extremity of the cauteri with oil or album of hou or mucilage of fenugrec or similar things; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and then take the pouch and express all that is in the binding into the bedpan; and then remove the binding and the patient will put their knees to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to come out, keep it as long as possible; and if they sleep with that for all of one night, it is more likely to bring about a good outcome.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you bind that in the diseases of flux and evacuation of stool, then you must iterate the cauteri until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or apostemats in the navel, then you must use a binding that is gentle and soft, like those with which children are bound.
De curacio de las plaguas.	The Cure of Plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the cure of plagues that which pertains to the free [person], and I say thus the cure of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are diversified according to how they are made and according to the place where one falls ill.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which most plagues are made are just as follows: corruption of air, or incision with a sword or dagger, or striking with a lance, or hitting with a club, or arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the plagues that are in the parts of the body are like this: plague which is on the head, or neck, or feet, or belly, or thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the cure for some plagues by which that ratio and rule will apply to other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the plagues of the head simple, for the recollection of the compound will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to corruption of air or similar cause, and the patient has already suffered great pain and there is danger of apostema developing, then you should take care and immediately bleed the cephalic vein, and do not delay; and extract from that blood according to the quantity of its virtue, unless some other cause prohibits bleeding, especially if the blood that comes out of the plague is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it should be the bleeding from the opposite side of the affected part; and take care to keep the patient away from replenishment and from meat and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if any cause prohibits [bleeding], then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause over the plague, if it becomes an apostema with caution, cut into the inflamed area with a razor or in wine that is sterilized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain that the abscess is cautions, then pause over the plague, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed the powder which you recommended, only a little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then pause over another ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the plague is great or is due to incision of a sword and similar causes, and the lips are not adjusted because of pus, then adjust them with suture according to what I recommend for the suture of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the plague has already been discovered in the bone and skin, and it is not retention of pus but only a small suspensori, then incise it and immediately cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh to its original state, and command the patient to eat foods that are greasy: caps and forms like those, until they are composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the bone and it does not adhere to the surrounding tissue, then you must incise the entire area and cut it out, and immediately cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not severed by medicines, then you must inquire about the artery, and if you find that one which has not been cut, then you must incise it with a spatula or ligate it; and if necessity demands, do what we have said earlier, namely, cauterize until the blood is absorbed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; in this way you should powderize over those with this powder, because it will consolidate before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take oil of hellebore, one part; blood of dragon, two parts; and no-extinct cause, three parts. Grind all together well and finely, and fill the plague with it, and constrain it with good constriction until it adheres well to that place, and coagulate it with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And appropriate tightly that which is above with powder and loosen it a little, and do not remove it until it is in such a state that it is not apostemated, for the medicine is not absorbed by it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this alone causes trouble when you are not present with oil of hellebore and blood of dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And already this same operation is done on great plagues when it is necessary to pause over those and to tighten them, and on recent plagues with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer time, then it is not intended to place this powder on them, but rather cure those with what we have said, by pausing over them with certain ointments or by placing powder of barley flour mixed with water and honey until they produce pus; and immediately cure those with the other medication until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you should extract that with gentle gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I shall direct the cure for fractures of the head in what is necessary.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plagues of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague occurs in the neck, then it is not different from it [the previous topic] in terms of medication, and between the plague of the head when simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are already cut or an artery is involved, then if it is a nerve, do not intervene in it, but rather avoid any cure that might cause vehement stiptication, just as you would with ziniar and zegi which is similar to vetriol and resembles them, so as not to harm the nerves and contract that one.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause over the plague any cause that is too fleeting, because the substance of the nerves is fleeting and their continuation is with the brain, which is the most noble of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that is cured with light medicines, just as it is washed with double water, some having been infused in rose oil or not-rose oil, and thucia when it is washed with double water and the other parts mincing according to this manner, and ointments moist.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague is great, then you should administer sutures, or compress the lips of it, and immediately cure that with powder until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the plague is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the pus, then you should perforate that at the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the plague an artery has already been cut and bleeding occurs, then you should separate or dry it, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent further bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of them have been incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should adjust the lips of the spine with a suture over the canal of the neck and do not touch it; before that, equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and immediately strengthen it with decent traction, and loosen it for several days; and immediately cure it with ointments in which there is stiptication and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the plague has made a fracture in the bone, then you should pound it, and then if there are fragments of bone, extract all that you can from them; and what is not apparelled, leave it until the plague subsides, and be separated and the excrescence from it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powderize over it the powder which I have recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the plague has created a fistula, then cure it with that which will come to mind in the next chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the neck or similar ones when it occurs between the vertebrae and is made with a sword or with a cotelette or with a lance or with similar ones.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or cotelette percussion and you penetrate to the depth of the wound, then consider more whether there is ventosity from the plague when the patient is emaciated; know that the plague is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the plague is recent with its own blood, then you should pause on it for the first hour with powder, and not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and does not return to the heart and cause the patient's death, but rather pause on it with an attractive ointment, and remove it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then you should pause in the orifice of the plague a cuticle so that it sucks out what flows from the humidities; and make the patient sleep over the plague so that the liquid that is in it becomes adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague has passed three days or more and there is no spasme nor tremor of heart nor constriction of breath, and times other good dispositions of it, then you should know that the plague is saved; and then cure it with poultices and with the other medication until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then you should know that a fistula has been made; cure therefore that according to the next chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is due to incision with a sword or cotelette, and it is simple in the superficial layer of the foot or hand, then you should cure it with that which precedes suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has made a fracture in the bone, and you have already cut through it, then you should twist the plague and pull out those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then you should leave them alone until the plague subsides, for the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for the other plagues that occur in the other members, the judgment on treatment is the judgment of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great or small or mid-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great ones, it often happens that the bowels or nerves of the bowels are affected, whereby an introduction is made and a suture is required to be more violent and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it becomes clear that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care to introduce them back into their place as soon as possible, because they swell and are engrossed, making the instrument of it difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is mid-sized, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the bowels, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the belly is according to four manners, but two suture methods are common which occur in the suture of other plagues of the chest.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other suture methods proper to communicate with the other plagues, but however they are more proper in the suturing of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you all exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So I say that when the plague is small and some cause from the belly by that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the belly has become inflamed by the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when this is the case, then it is necessary that you scrape that area and submerge a sponge or wet cloth in hot water, or that you take it out of the bath and apply cyperum, spic, and embrocate to that area until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes I have seen that this [cyperum, spic, and embrocate] has had a stimulating effect in the area where there is inflammation, and it is better than just water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the belly with water in which there are high and bad qualities, because through this the instrument of it is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of it resists this cure, then you should divide the disruption into small pieces with an instrument on which there are incised engravings.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is proper and not secundary, and there is no occasion to cut unnecessarily near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, it is necessary that its form be such:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one part of it is twisted and sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the extremity is subtle, and not be as fine as a spatula, but rather obtuse a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the plague is amplified and protrudes outside the belly, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible above it, because better it is.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and pause their knees higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you pause the head and feet higher than the remaining parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your intention and consideration at all times so that the part where the plague is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And similarly, it is necessary to administer this in great plagues and in mid-sized plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, pause this which is at your preparation, and prepare to make the minister between your most skilled hands, which has the disruption all with its own hand and adjusts the lips of it, and prepares to uncover that from that which sees some cause for another suturing.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the size of the abscess; and then leave the extremity of the disruption at the anular region, and pull the needle one time, or twice, depending on whether you are inserting a faithful thread into both extremities of the code, with two extremities of the ciphac that is left over from the partitions within, until it makes that penetrate that part; and you have already added two extremities of the code and two extremities of the ciphac, making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then pull the thread double in the loop of the needle, and sometimes two parts together, and add the two lips and the abscess by decent addition; and leave the thickness of the digit and put another needle in it, and tie that to a thread like the first needle; and do not stop doing this until there is no more necessity with the needles until you have completed all the tension of the abscess.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles are mid-sized between coarseness and subtlety, because the fine needles barely touch the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to manipulate in the code, and therefore it is necessary that they be mid-sized in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted in two extremities of the code at once, so that the flesh is not barely touched and the plague is not exacerbated before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the sutures should not be prolonged so that the plague is prevented from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And appropriate to insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient's rest while sleeping; and pause over the suture, spreading out the powders from all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of suture with needles in this manner is more suitable for small plagues, because it can be done with one needle or two around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four extremities, of the code and two extremities of the ciphac, in one pass, with a needle wrapped in thread, where there is subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle to that middle part from which it began, in order that the thread retires from the most superior part of the plague, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with threads that are stretched.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the amount of thickness of the digit less.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known by men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I cured the abscess which had been injured in a man's belly who had been wounded with a knife, and it was the disruption of the larger abscess of one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the navel and was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the belly had been opened for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and cured him, and then he lived for many years and is converted to his dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; and by a miracle, because you did not cure him with medicine, for it was in a place where no medicine was found or any remedy, but rather pause over the plague, cutting off two times a day and ablution frequent with water of honey until he was cured.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell two species of sutures that are proper, according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the code, and enter the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then, when the needle enters the code and in that meets the lacertus according to rectitude and length of all the body, and leave the extremity of the ciphac in which you have inserted the needle; and make penetrate into the other extremity the needle from the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the mihat.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then, when you have made that penetrate, pause and make it penetrate again in that same extremity of the mihat from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the ciphac that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make penetrate with that your penetration, which you make it penetrate in the ciphac at the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part of you until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then, start on this side of the same way and sew that with the extremity that is from the ciphac to the other side, and take out the needle from the code which penetrated, and then reduce it in this code and sew the extremity of the ciphac which is on the other side to this extremity of the mirror; and take out that from the code which is part of you.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do it once and another time, and do it once again close to the other time until you have sewn all that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with a suture of skins in which you sew the flesh, so that you sew the ciphac once from the part of the extremity of the code, and then leave it another time until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second proper species of suture which I call Gualia, and this is said to be from the womb of life and for life recounted, is that you sew according to semilitut with which certain medicines are sewn, in such a way that they add all parts to their corresponding part, as is convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one side and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of one side, and this is done according to what you have recounted.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You should place the needle in the extremity of the mirror, at your own end from the outside part, and make it penetrate into the inside part in that same one; and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and then turn the needle back and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the ciphac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those same ones around, and make them penetrate from the inside part to the outside part in two other extremities of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common lightweight suture, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the saying of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And others will say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so you insert in these [stitches] a thread, and begin with the introduction of a needle of what belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing of those who sew skin together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly, the suture of life (lu) is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of medicine regarding a plague is a judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason is that when you succeed in curing the recent plague with the patient's own blood before it has altered and reduced the swelling and sewed it up and adapted it decently, then pause over that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that which certain medicines have done to you, until they make a hard crust and loosen the threads, and are consolidated ciphac and mirror; and thus cure it just as is the cure of other plagues, so that it may be healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you don't have the medicines present, then pause over that for now, since it begins to bear fruit, cut well, and exchange it two times a day, just as I taught you, until it is healed, because you won't need other medicine in many dispositions when plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague will spread to the main members, then it is good that you submerge a lion's hair in quality tempered oil or in rosin oil, and pause that in the circuit of the places that are between the joints and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own swellings, because many times it seems to be developing, then anoint that with vi stiptic black tebe, and especially if the inflammation has spread to the swelling and is made to burst forth penetrating into the cavity of life.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that what is in the thick swelling is of a more light healing than what is in the subtle swellings.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the swelling which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from plague that settles in its entirety; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that one, and because of its proximity to the natural state of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the process of the plague is the fabric, and you succeed in getting it recent, then reduce it according to your own straightness with which you reduce swellings evenly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already green or black, then when you stretch that with a thread over the location that is degraded from life, in order that the flow of blood may come back, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And thus inscribe this that is another bond, and pause the two ends of the thread pending on the side opposite to the plague foro lu, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of life towards the settling of the fabric and emission of the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of plagues when they occur in the swelling.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the swelling and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in certain people, because of this, since you see one who was struck with plague in his own belly with a blow from a lance and had a plague on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and made a fistula, and there was great effort and ventosity.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore you pursued the cure of life even though it was not confirmed in its healing, but instead you continued to subtletize that until it is sanctified and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you saw that the place was already consolidated, and then you came to the patient who had developed an evil illness on his own belly due to the accident of evil; and no one else could heal him through this evil accident and remained in his usual miserable state eating and drinking, and thus entered into a bath and was exercised in his own strength.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones will say that when a plague develops in the swelling, and it is small, then it is necessary to tie it according to this manner: and it is that you take figs of great size; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and pause one fig from those that have an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes hold on them and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of life, because it adheres and will not be dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And thus pause another fig close to the first one, and do not cease to make figures one after another according to the quantity of the entire plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And thus reduce the swelling and cover it with the plague; and remain those heads attached in the swelling until the swelling is healed; and no harm will come to anyone.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the swelling may be tied with a fine thread made from the swelling of an animal attached to life, since it is more in harmony; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of the swelling, and it is much denuded, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of life, wrapped, and then insert that thread into the holes and cover it with the swelling, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suture with figs is nothing but according to the way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle swellings, because then it is not just subtlety, but rather a complete healing of life as a whole.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every plague and apostema when it becomes old and antiquated, and is made an ulcer, and not consolidated and gives arm to the body all the time and is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called fistula and we call it abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is a nodulation made of fat, hard, white, with which there is no pain and in which there is a cavity just as it is in the pain of an owl; and therefore we call that abscess of rice, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people's abscesses that it is watery, which gives arm; and very soon the moisture is discharged in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is much, and it is little, and it is big, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, then as I say that plagues, that every ulcer that is not healed or is not in bare flesh is due to one of these nine causes: of which one is because there is too little blood in the body; or because it is evil; or because between life and the lips is hard skin that prevents the natural growth of flesh; or because it is too long-lasting; or because the ulcer itself puts forth pus and the material that is sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in the healing of it; or when corruption seizes the region, and it is pestilence; or by the property of the region as it happens in Saragossa, where digestion of illnesses is difficult and healing of apostema is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have already shown all those causes and their signs and the cure for them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so it is necessary that you should know the cure for fistula, which is made by way of operation with my own hands.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body, because there are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or ciphac, or swelling, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints composed by composition as if of the hand and foot; and from these it is that there are those that give proximity to the main member and similar things.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that one of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is some fistula whose depth does not reach these places that I have said, and you wait and hope for its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a risk with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows the right path, and you will probe it with the instrument.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead, because lead is lightened by its own weight and curved in such a way that it follows the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is filled with many horrors, it is not possible for you to signify anything about it by attempt.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then block the opening with your own openings, because the moisture which you will use to block it will flow into the other openings and run from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And thus inquire with exquisite care, according to which manner it is possible for you to know whether here there are bones or nerves, and if the fistula's cavity is distant or close by, or if it is a fistula that has many openings and lies above this whole, in accordance with the sum of your strength, with your understanding, with which you understand the illness, and the invention of pain due to your compression on the place, and similar signs and causes of accidents affecting the apostema.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all those causes with steady vision, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now whether it is an apparent fistula nearby or in a place of salt, distant from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And now you will close the fistula according to what has been said above about its narration, and leave it in that filtration and corruption of flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh, or in the thread and similar things, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of long distance and depth, and follows the right path, then you must inscribe it in the preon as much as possible, and accordingly cleanse it of all its corrupt flesh; and accordingly administer some enveloped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And then apply it to that with some repeated times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you must cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to certify this, then you must investigate it and close it according to what we have recounted, unless you prohibit any cause related to a vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, then you must remove that which is corrupted until all corruption is purged out; and accordingly cure it with what encases it until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and gives arm as it used to, then you must know that you have not reached the complete eradication of corruption; and therefore you uncover over it secondarily and exquisitely make the reason of it and the purification of it with the utmost force, and accordingly restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, be well; and otherwise, you must know that that corruption is in the deep and distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and then to you it is not possible to do anything but leave it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to your ability to draw it in, then you must draw it in with subtle forceps which are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you must make the extraction of all those with exquisite care, and do not leave any cause for your strength to be weakened.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is some cause of opposition from the fluids, and in their insertion you have no fear or error, then you must insert those ligaments or flesh if it is here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at your moment, then pause over the wound that is pressing on the wound itself, and leave it until what surrounds those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and be constricted by the section which you have inserted in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	They had, if you fear, pause over it with a poultice of warm oil, or a poultice of Egyptian gentian, or one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments relax and the bones are separated from their ablation, and that attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the one of the hip or the spine or similar to those, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface of it so much as to be considered, then you must remove that which is corrupted with scissors only at the back until that blackness and corruption is removed, and accordingly restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted from it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and all insert into the place where the corruption has taken hold, and then cure it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you try to find a man in his cossy for whom you can pause that and example and assistant over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Find a young man of about xxx years old, to whom you will assign pain in his cossy, and the parts that are inside him are mauled by something outside, over the material of the body until the material is reached at the cossy, and it is material of apostema with great apostema, and there is no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was extended with that error of the physicians until the apostema became swollen, and there was a flow of materials many, and its cure was accordingly paused until the cossy became fistulada, and it made holes in the many openings which all poured pus and the fluids of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the multitude of physicians was summoned around two years, and there was not wisdom in them but only in the art, until you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the cossy of that man and the materials that were flowing from it through those openings for a great space; and already the body of that man was entirely stabilized, and the color of it was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the tent into one of those openings and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And accordingly, I and searched all the openings and found those that led to their parts of the cossy.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I carefully examined and incised one of the openings, and discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted, and already it was terrifying and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the cossy had been corrupted, having penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I sewed up what was discovered and prepared from the bone that was uncovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I cut away what was not in the bone but that corruption which had abscessed and needed to be cut away, and I had already cleaned it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And accordingly, I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And accordingly, I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily on the first discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I sewed up what appeared to be from that corruption, and accordingly, I was pierced to make the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered on another occasion that the corruption had not ceased, and I did not cease to insert the small bone little by little, particularly and pierced it to make the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I inserted around a palm's length of it, and that extracted with its own marrow, and accordingly, it was restored with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of him and section of him, except for the disposition of the fragile bone and for the scarcity of tolerance and fear of death, because to him it happened all hours for excessive evacuation of bad syncopy.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore he is healed entirely, and nothing remains in place of osseous hard cartilage; and it is made good the disposition of him in his own body and return to its virtue; and it is converted into its own dispositions and does not do anything contrary to it in ambulation or harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is a bone that protrudes in the body and is already worn out, then you must cut it according to this manner: take a ligament and stretch it at the end of that prominent bone; and command someone to extend it so far; and pause that ligament, taking a thicker piece of wool than the first one; and accordingly tie that over the flesh that remains on the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you can draw the flesh to the parts left over; and then uncover the flesh over the location where you want to sew, so that the seam will not cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause a fust or table left over the bone, for when you do this it is not prohibited that the seam does not cut into the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the suture be done little by little over the corrupted area, because if it is in the concavity of the bone, corruption and not apparent to the sense, and force another suture.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it's better to take away one part and connect it with another, and if the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you uncover all the flesh in every part; and accordingly, pause a fust (fistula) there, and accordingly suture that from the first part where the corruption is, into the other part until the suturing of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the suture be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not reasonable but rather ingenious.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the pectoral region of the arm or chest, it's very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and what method you use to remove it, and according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with all ingenious means be corrected, except when it comes to veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that the incisors and the cuts to be made are many according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those bones, and their thickness, subtlety, greatness, and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; for it is necessary that you prepare all sorts of instruments convenient for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation means nothing to you unless you have a great study and long experience of the instrument that you need; when with you is grand knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of experiences of illnesses, for then already you had it for yourself what is convenient for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will give you the name of the instruments which are simple and with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	I think I've reached the end of this mysterious text!
Forma de autra serra:	Another one!
Forma de autra serra:	Another one!
Forma de autra serra gran:	A bigger one!
Forma de ray:	A ray!
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray is like the head of a star-shaped key, and its points are like the points on an astigmatic instrument.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it's not necessary to do anything except that with this instrument you should scrape off the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is very large.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The form of the greater razori (instrument) compared to others:
Forma de razori menor:	The form of the lesser razori (instrument):
Forma de razori lat:	The form of the flat razori (instrument):
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The form of another type of saw (serra):
Forma de lu:	Another one!
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The form of the saw (razori) that has curvature:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another subtle form of the saw (razori):
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Another form of saw (razori) with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The form of the small saw (rasori) that resembles a tenet:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The form of the incisor with which one cuts the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The form of another incisor; this one resembles a ray, and the extremity is like a saw, and it is used in many locations in the ratio of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the ray that corresponds to the ratio of the one who is pierced by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and has a sharp edge.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly it should be noted that all the causes we have discussed regarding razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The incision extremities and the suturing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be affected either by an internal or external cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not come to pass, or sometimes the corruption goes to such a degree that it affects the member which is not struck by any cause, then it is necessary that you incise that member within this honor, so that the patient escapes through death or malice which is more deflement of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it occurs is that the member becomes black until it is cut off, or one can approach the blackness until the burning coals are inside that member and take hold all over the body; and therefore I advise you to incise there.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it is a cause of corruption due to the percussion of certain venomous causes, such as that of the sea scorpion, or viper, or rattle snake, and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should incise that of the wrist of the elbow, and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it reaches that point, then you should incise the arm up to the shoulder joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond that point and reaches the shoulder joint, then it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause apart from this in treatment is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you should incise that up to one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it spreads into the ankle, then you should incise the calf up to the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread beyond the ankle, then there is no remedy but death, and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising or sawing a member is to tighten one ligament in the part that you want to incise, and then tighten another ligament over the spot; and extend the minister's assistant with one ligament to the parts behind, and extend the minister's assistant with another ligament in front; and separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, leaving a space of about an inch or so until all the flesh is exposed; and then incise or saw as needed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that a cloth be placed over all the parts so that the area will not be touched, and that the patient will receive an adjusted lesion and a careful abscess.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs during the procedure, then you should cauterize the area carefully, or apply some powder to stop the bleeding; and then return to your medication as needed until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the wounded member with ligaments at a suitable place, and cure it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that you try this on a man's foot, and if an accident occurs, as it did with me, which is when the blackness appeared on his foot due to the adjustment that was made to combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurred first in his toe, spreading throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself to try again with even more vigor than before to bring the cure to the member with great violence and pain, and he incised that foot up to the joint, and it was healed by fire.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time afterwards, that same corruption occurred in the finger of my hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and so performed the repetition of that excess above my hand with a mixture of medicines, and thus brought about the purification of the body; and the excess was not re-absorbed and began to spread to another finger on my hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the doctor told me to incise my hand, and I did not want to do so, hoping that the repercussions of that excess would subside on their own, but rather feared that incision of my hand would be mortal, for the patient's virtue was very precarious.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and I was told that the man prepared and incised his entire hand, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration except to serve as an aid in understanding the nature of this disease, and to provide a significance by which it may be interpreted and acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the cure of wounds and the quality of purging with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it breaks open and perforates, and the pus flows out, and the wound remains like a vessel, with the skin above it appearing like fine cloth, and no further corruption occurs, nor does it penetrate into the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged and the corruption presses into some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for it is that you incise the entire skinfold just as it is turned back, and most especially when it is thin and appears like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you fear that the skinfold will adhere and that corruption will not be removed by direct consequence, and in the skinfold there is a breach on one side, then you should cure it with a poultice.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And this is how you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and if your nose is filled with fetid odor, then poultice that area with Egyptian medicine which is made from oil, vinegar, and zinc receiving equal parts, and adjust them in a vessel, and apply them to the fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches a sweet melting point.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from it the amount that is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and poultice that area with the mixture, and strengthen the opening of the sinus, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that poultice with great care; and do so for as many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is poulticed with ash water, when this medicine is not present; and so you take the ash of vetch, and mix it with water; and then add that to the poultice and apply it to the area until you are certain that the sinus has been completely cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then poultice that area with honey and water mixed with finely ground zinc, and poultice that area with vinegar and honey mixed, because of the property of honey that it purifies and cleanses, and vinegar makes the sinus adhere, and most especially when there is excess stipticity and dryness in the vinegar.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this a few times and are confident that the sinus is now cleared, then poultice that area with water that makes the skin appear in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And so take a mixture of diaphanous and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic vinegar; or poultice that area with some medicines and ointments that have properties which I have written about in the treatise on remedies.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot be received by the cannula of the poultice, then you should dilate that orifice with a small iron instrument gradually, and pause in it wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilic ointment until it is dilated.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you should add the edges of it with a suture and leave a quantity in which the poultice can be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the stench flows is elevated above the parts above, then dry that out at the lowest point of it so that the stench can flow back into it, for when the stench is constricted in the sinus the flesh will be generated within it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry out the sinus within the vicinity of the bone at the lowest point, then you should pierce that member with preparation so that the stench flows slightly from it according to your apparel and is not retained by any cause in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are placed on the sinus according to your desire, and extend those on cloth of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity that it covers all the sinus; and then incise with fine forceps on the right side of the orifice of the sinus, making a channel slightly larger than the orifice of the sinus; and then extend over another piece of linen, applying the leon's ointment according to the size of the channel, and pause it above that for distant position from the orifice of the sinus so that the flow of the stench may be alleviated and not disturb the cloth too much; and leave it there for a few days at a time.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is above the orifice of the sinus, which you should leave in place for an entire hour because it is adjusted to be on the stench.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what comes from the stench is much or little, or is digested or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you should consider the location of that sinus, whether in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is shed on the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or approaches adherence, then lift it up or remove it three days later, and when you remove the wound, then change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has a long space underneath it where subtle virus resides, then do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing of it approaches, and because some people have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and those who are opposite to this.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus there are many days of undigested stench, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if there is a delay in the adhesion of the sinus and it is caused by prolongation, then you should adjust to drying up with medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they are dried up like diaphanous ointment, when there is excessive addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most excellent medicine of all that is used to heal it is this: take diaphanous ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and spread it over the area where the old wound is located in its substance, and then apply that to it, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to work in that action, when there is no stench, diaphanous ointment, honey when it is mixed with the heat and becomes thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and gallnuts, and grind them all together and powderize them on the honey which is placed over the fire, and then line it up with water on cloth and strengthen that over the sinus; and line it up with the honey which you have mixed with the heat and becomes thickened, and powderize it on cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes administer to it aristology longa and roots of lily celestial (and it is lily celestial) and flour of ears and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, grind them together and powderize them on the honey which I have recommended; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and it already shows signs of inquiry in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you should treat it with fistular cure, just as it is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the cure of boils, worn-out nails, and incisions of fingers added and sections.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Boils are abscesses that form under the nail of the finger or toe, and spread to other fingers and toes. As they become prolonged and their cure is more precious, they either abscess with caution, or corrupt, and emit a stench into the bone until it becomes putrid, and the extremity of the finger or toe becomes gangrenous, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore, when you have applied the water that we have mentioned in the division and your cure does not bring relief, then it is necessary to incise with iron all the superfluous flesh that remains from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound with water, for cauterization is very helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already consumed the flesh to the inner parts, and it begins to pierce and puncture that flesh, then you should pause a subtle ray below the angle of the nail where the flesh is pierced, and push it up and incise that flesh with ease, and pause above what remains of the flesh with medicines that corrode into what is left; and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to incise the bone and extract it, for there is no time when a corrupted bone can be healed.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption go to the finger, then you should incise it in one of the nodes according to what is remembered of its recollection, and then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail is inflamed with percussion or attrition, and there is great pain in it, then you should at first bleed the patient, and then cut off the nail with a sharp spatula making a transverse incision from top to bottom, and take care that the incision does not reach into the flesh that is left under the nail, lest you cause the patient's severe pain to become even more intense, and thus occasion the nativity of superfluous flesh in the area; and then cure that place with water that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But this adjustment, which is natural in most men, is that it is flesh all, and sometimes in the bones, or sometimes in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the joint of the bone, or it is the nativity of them in certain nodes of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in certain nodes of the finger does not become bad, and that which is born in the joints is very bad.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born as fleshiness, the section is light, and it is because you should incise the root with a spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born in the joint of the bone, the cure is difficult; and therefore take care to avoid the abscess.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born on the finger, you should remove the nodes; first incise the flesh of it with an incision round to the bone, and then cut with one of those scissors that are suitable for this purpose, and then cure it until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But the consolidation that occurs on the fingers between their joints or by the nativity of the human being that is present in it, or by consolidation of wound or by burning with fire, or by similar things, then it is necessary to cut through that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between their cloths with the enfused oil in rose oil so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or pause between them a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs on some fingers with the palm, then you should cut through that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforms to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	The incision of veins, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose, and also enveloped thick veins full of melancholic superfluities which come forth in great bulk from the members of the body, and most commonly occur in the hips, and most particularly in the hips of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it is necessary that you administer purification of the body with black choleric purgation some times with strong expulsion, and then let the patient's blood be drawn from the Basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the cure of theirs with iron is according to two manners: one is that you should incise and attract that black blood, and the other manner is that you should raise the vein and extract all.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of it is according to this manner: first broach the hip with cold water very much until the thick blood is resolved, which is feculent from the hip, and then strengthen the hip of the patient at the uppermost part of the cask below the fold of the skin, and then cut off the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision, and then raise the black blood with the tourniquet at the lower part of the hip into it, and from above to below, until the amount of blood that you want and which is necessary has been removed, and which takes away the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then lie down and command to yourself that you shall abstain from eating black choleric foods that generate.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And iterate the cure through bleeding when the veins are filled and notice to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of theirs is according to this manner: you who raise the hip of the patient, if it is in its place by the strength of their legs, and then put it in bathwater and broach the hip with cold water until it becomes red and the veins are swollen; or that they be exercised vigorously if bathwater is not present, until the member is scorched.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord in the right side of the vein by sectioning in the long or the last part of it, or in the lowest part of it you will find the thread.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then tie the cord with knots and excise the vein entirely from top to bottom until it appears in its natural state, and it is necessary to recognize the appearance of it which sometimes that old lady requests to decline into darkness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then as you untie and cut the cord, you will find that white thread which is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you should put it down that white thread into the ray so that it is elevated and thrown away from the cord, and suspend it with one ounce of lion's claw.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision right next to that incision for three fingers, and then excise the cord from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise it and incise it in the back section of the thread, and then extract it and elevate it until it is removed through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then do this until you extract it from the highest or uppermost section of all the sections, until everything is removed; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it up and extract it, or insert it below the ray and turn your hand around all parts until it is thrown away.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is torn, it will be difficult to elevate the thread and it will come back to harm the patient through that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the thread is completely removed, then pause over the place of the wound with a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil and cold oil, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the life is constricted due to twisting and turning that wraps around the parts, and it is not according to straightness as we have said, then you must cut through all the twisted parts of it and at the places of wrapping of it, and then suspend it with knots until you elevate it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful that your incision does not cut into the vein and does not harm it, for if you do, it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incident in which the vein is cut:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of lion's claw (unci orp):
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not like that at all, nor is it similar to the knots or needles, and it is not of sharp extremity in order that it may not harm the vein; but it is of great flexibility like a lion's claw, so if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; having an excessive thickness, just as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the saphenous vein:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the hips, in cold lands like those of the Atigians in Arabia and in dry and barren lands of little fertility in India, where there is no grass nor broom.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the hips.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that follows the cord, just as venom drips out of the body of serpents and worms and scorpians, and worms generating between the cord and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the suspicion of its coming is this: that vein which happens in the hip becomes inflamed with great heat; and near the place, it vesicates; and near as it begins to emerge from that vesication, it looks like a root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears from him, it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one-third of a dragon's weight, and notarize that and leave the lead suspended from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you find some cause at the parts outside, wrap it in lead and tie that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you must incise one part of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not cut that which is of reason until it is fully outside, for if you cut that, it will be constricted and enter into the flesh and cause apostema, pus formation, and bad ulceration in the place.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is necessary to be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is fully removed from the last part of it and there is not any remaining cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it has been found in some men who are twenty palms long and I have already seen one that is thirty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during the hour of its medication, then insert the ray into the wound and perforate it with a long hole in the body, until all that which is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medicines; and then cure it through the healing of apostemas.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many branches, and most particularly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes to have many openings, and is found from each opening a branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure it as we have said in the division, and with what is above mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the excision of worms generated under the skin and called "Aegritudo Bovina".
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called "malautia bovina" in some land because it often happens to oxen and there is a worm that is born between the cord and the flesh, and it goes throughout the whole body up and down, and it is shown to the sense of the individual's own member by member until it breaks the cord and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to putrefaction of some humors, just as it happens with worms and serpents and lizards in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then very strong heat arises in it and enters and destroys the brain, and thus many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure that and remove it, you must not do so unless you have first made the patient's ambulation and appearance manifest to the sense, and then you must strengthen what is above it and what is below it with a strong bond, and then cut above it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is pressed into the flesh and you do not attend to it, then you must pause a cauterization with fire on the location until it dies, and the greatest fear that is feared is corruption of it, which corrupts the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you notice that the condition has reached the head near the brain, then strengthen above the skull with a strong stricture, and then cut above it, and extract that; and see to it that the patient uses purgation of their own body with medicines evacuating putrid humors, and beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the excision of the affliction called "Nafir".
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "Nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and it spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen it, as I recommended.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein that runs down the arm, and after an hour, I saw that inflammation go away as if it were a worm rising up to this point, but more slowly than would be proper, as if it were silver alive when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I went to the pain in that place and fixed myself in the muscle, and after a little while, it stuck there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it corrected itself in the other body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I told myself that it was revolving itself throughout its own body, according to what you saw; and it was too marvelous to me the permutation of it and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen something similar to this in my own veins according to that manner, however I have seen many others which are painful and changed from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it with the veins as I saw it in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was just this, but because the woman was old, with dry skin and veins that were visible, and in this way, the appearance of that swelling appeared to the sense.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this reversal in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with veins that are softened.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at their head as we have said, but instead strengthen above that point and let it dry slightly over that area until that swelling is reduced, and then cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not take it into account in your own veins, then cure that by purging the body and by what evacuates swellings, and with those pills made of fetid things and with pills of sarpia and similar substances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the Extraction of Sagittas.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sagetas are diversified according to species, and according to the locations in the body where they reside, for their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones, which are solid; and others have three angles, and those with tongues; and those with stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the passions in which it resides is done in two ways: for some members are principal concave ones, like the brain, heart, and kidney, and lungs, trachea, and bladder, and bladder, and so when it appears in one of these members and shows you signs of death, then I recommend that you avoid extracting that sageta from those where death is imminent, and when to you it does not appear as such signals, and the sageta is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that one and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of death is when the sageta appears in the skull, breaks through the bone, and emerges from the cerebrum which lies above the brainstem, for it causes by its intense heat, scotoma, vertigo, roaring in the ears, inflammation and roaring of the tongue, spasms and mixing up of understanding, vomiting of bile, and very strong language is cut off and destroyed the voice. And it emerges from the location of the wound a white humidity like powder, and you see it similar to the moisture of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you see these signs, then you should abstain from the cure and extraction of the sageta, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the sageta when it appears in the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels like a hard lump, and not a soft one; and very strongly the movement of the sageta resembles the movement of the pulse, and there is bleeding from the wound with black blood, and there is numbness in the extremities, and cold shivering, and syncope; and therefore know that death is descending upon you.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the sageta has attacked the lung are that it is accompanied by frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and a great amount of spirit expires, and he demands attraction of cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the sageta appears in the vermilion of the legs, and the pain is located near the small bones of the ribs, and a great cry arises with intense pain and sighing, and none of the muscles are spared.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the sageta appears in the stomach, then very quickly one sees food from the wound that is undigested.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the sageta appears in the abdomen and is fixed there, then one sees some opening from the wound, or a tear, or a bladder that is ruptured, and there is no hope for the cure of the wound through extraction of the sageta.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the sageta appears in the bladder and is passed outside as urine, and causes some external damage to the surrounding areas, and there is great pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But other members such as the face, neck, and shoulders, and the spines of the back, and the furcula, and the coccyx, and the pelvis, and their likenesses of members, are saved according to the greater dispositions when the sageta does not touch a vein or artery and is not a venomous sageta.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend this to you, that which I have seen of the nature of these sagetas, by which you may signify for this on the cure itself.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	Which is because in one man, a sageta appeared in the lacrimal duct of the eye socket, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the grey matter of the ear intact, and he was healed, and there was no harm done to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another sageta from a Jew, which appeared in the grey matter of his eye socket, leaving it behind the eyelid and then hidden, and only a small tip remained attached to the stalk, and it was a great sageta of the sharp sagetas of the Turks, with a lion's claw that had no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And so the Jew recovered, and did not experience any further harm in his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another sageta from a Christian man, which was lodged in the shoulder, and it was an Arab sageta, and it had ears; and then I cut into it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the shoulder joint of his arm; and then I carefully removed it, and thus extracted it, and the Christian man was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another sageta from a man who was lodged in his abdomen, and thought he would die from it; and so, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred in his dispositions, I cut into the sageta and worked around it, and he was healed, and there was no further harm to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom a sageta had lodged in his back, and the wound was consolidated over it, and after seven years, the sageta emerged in the root of the spine.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom a sageta had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound was consolidated on the inside, and there was no change in her dispositions in seven years, and the woman did not experience any harm or discomfort in her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom a sageta had lodged on his face and the wound was consolidated and remained there without causing any great pain or distress.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the sageta from the nose of the king's son, which was lodged in the middle part of his nose and had already begun to decline towards the right side, and all of the sageta was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the cure of him within three days after the appearance of the sageta.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I approached the wound of the sageta with great care; and then I asked her if she felt any pain, but she didn't feel anything; only she felt a prickling sensation behind the right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the sageta.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a poultice to the location with an attractive and digestive plaster, convincing myself that the location was becoming inflamed because it appeared to me as if the location of the sageta had become apostemated, causing me to bleed over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant accident in the location that the sageta had obtained, and I continued to apply the plaster over it for many days and there was no accident; and the wound consolidated at the same time, and the patient's condition improved through space of many days until one day he felt the sageta inside his nose and recognized it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied medicine acute corrosive to the wound for many days until it was fully open, and with a tentative touch I cut away that part of the sageta which was attached to the stalk.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the position of the wound with that medicine acute until it became visible to me as if the tip of the sageta had appeared, and passed away from my sight after some time through the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then as the wound became more amplified, and it was possible for me to enter the fingers into it, I remained there and did not stop until it was fully restored, whereas I had previously ceased subtlety and ingenuity in handling it with manual skills, until one day I began to take hold of it with forceps descenting faytas, according to the form that would come at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed with complete health, and there is no inconvenience in him in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some sagetas, for which pause over this rule and significance that I have not said, because the parts of this art and its definitions are not comprehended through narration or comprehended by free will.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artists wise compare themselves with few on a little matter, and also over what is present and what is absent; and find new operation and new instruments necessary for the descent of external causes of art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that sagetas are not abandoned by the members in which they are lodged, but rather according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they enter; or by the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is attracted by the place into which it enters, or is a sageta proceeding from a carnous location, and is drawn and abandoned.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the order of the hour in which it appears, then you must let it be for some days until the flesh around it becomes softened and its attraction and egression are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is lodged in the bone and does not obey your order, then let it be for some days and iterate its attraction and motion each day, and it will eventually be abandoned.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your order after some days, then you must pierce the circle of the sageta in that bone with a subtle taravel all around until the location is amplified by the sageta, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the sageta is lodged in the bone of the skull and has proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears to be causing some of those ailments which I have described, then abstain from attempting to extract the sageta and let it remain for a few days; for if the sageta reaches the ciphac (a term referring to the cerebral cortex), death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the sageta is not lodged in the skull but only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the ciphac, and the patient remains ill for a few days, and no harm comes to them from those ailments, then you can endeavor in the attraction of the sageta and in its removal.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply lodged and does not obey your order to extract it, then you must administer taravels around the circle of the sageta as we have recounted, and carefully cure the location until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the sageta has become hidden in the location of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you must inquire into it with tentative touch, and if you feel it, then attract it with certain instruments that are suitable for its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot act upon it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the preon (a type of surgical instrument), and here there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then you must feel over the wound until it is amplified and it becomes possible to extract the sageta.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have a pair of forceps with which to hold it, then you must deliver the flesh in which it is lodged from all around with all the skill that you can muster; and manipulate over this, if you cannot achieve evasion through the fracture of the forceps and the torsion of those parts until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the sageta in each location where it is, then you must use with torsion of your hand and forceps all around until it obeys; and subtlety with subtle subtlety that the sageta is not broken and that it is made to be easily attracted by you and extracted.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you are unable to extract it at your first attempt, then let it be for some days until the parts around it can relax and settle, and then iterate on it when it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if it causes bleeding against your will, then you must administer what we have said in our chapter on healing.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of insidiousness in veins or nerves or cord, and administer skill in all manner possible to the evasion of the sageta; and do this with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as we have recounted.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then that you may counteract the sageta in such a way that the patient is according to the figure in which the settling of the sageta takes place, for it is more justifiable.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then you must administer according to what is possible for you by the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the sagetas that are abandoned by the contrary of the other part, or which have already proceeded into some part outside, or which cause gilbositat (a type of swelling) at the extremity of the sageta through sensation from the upper part of the cord and sometimes become elevated; then you must cease over it; and let the cessation be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then attract it, for it is made easy by the ceasing.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you must twist the instrument according to the contrary tendency until the sageta presses into the bone, and amplify as much as possible, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for some days, and then iterate on it until it yields.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the stalk of the sageta is in that place, then you must push it into the cavity.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the stalk has fallen and you must administer impulse, then you must introduce the instrument into that place, if it is deaf (i.e. numb or unresponsive), use a concealed instrument so that it enters the cavity of the body and approaches the tip of the sageta and then push it into the cavity.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the sageta is concave, then you must push it with a strong instrument that enters into it, because the sageta is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the sageta is entrenched, then it is necessary that you concave all the flesh in which it is located, if it is at your disposal, and then cure it with what is convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the sageta grows in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and is near enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is at your disposal to cut above it, then cut above it and guard yourself from insidiousness of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if needed, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps which are attracted to the sagetas:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their extremities are like the beaks of eagles, made as if with a saw when they take hold on the sageta so that it does not leave.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of these there are many species, great, small, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of greatness of the sageta and its paucity, and the amplitude of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of concealment instrument with this extremity that curves like the beak of an eagle, so that it is alleviated the instrument of the sageta in it, and impulse of that numb part:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of concealment instrument for a numb extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a ray, so that the instrument is alleviated from entering into the concave sageta and is pushed along with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On the surgery of veins:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of bleeding which are cut by bleeding surgery. of which there are 16 in the head. So it is two pulsating veins that are near the ears, as said by some; two herbs that are in the two temples, apparent ones; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two holes which are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guides that are on the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and so two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are cut in the arms are five. Because one of these is the cephalic vein, and it belongs to the wild breast; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and numb, and it is a middle vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name it "the vein of the whole body", and the basilica is the vein that is situated in the domestic breast, and is named "citillar", and they call it "the vein of the belly" by the common folk; and the arm veins, and it is situated above the elbow, and it is the one that is ligated, and it is the one that appears over the elbow in a manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of these is the one that lies below the curvature of the armpit of the wild breast; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the domestic breast; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild breast; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The bleeding of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, ancient and migrainous and sahaftic and ulcerous evils of the head, old.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I have recounted to you: it is that the patient's head be shaved, and the patient's head be rubbed in the occipital region with a cloth and good friction; then attract the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two veins and their locations appear near the ears in two places above the head; and want them to say "yes" with your said tie, and if you feel the pulse of those with the said tie, here sign it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the lancet-cutting instrument and it is that which is incised, and take it and introduce it below the vein in the cord so that the bleeding comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your arm and raise the vein and cord to the upper parts and incise the vein with an incision that is incised.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make come out as much blood as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen with poultices and let it remain until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now and previously in the beginning of the book, I have described the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two arterial veins that are on the temples, the bleeding is for ancient and bad migraines, frequent and severe eye problems, and acute effusions of fluids to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I have recounted to you: constrain the patient's neck so that the two veins appear by sense perception, and be demonstrated the pulse of them below the said tie; and then sign it with your said tie.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then lift the cord above the vein to the upper parts with the said tie indicated, and introduce the bleeding instrument incised below, and lift the vein upwards; and incise it thus as you have done in the two other veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause the said tie over the vein for an hour, and then pause on that spot with poultices and strengthen that above with a strong constriction, and let it remain until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now it is preceded by the recollection of theirs, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the bleeding of the vein of the forehead is for appropriate bleeding of the cephalic vein in old diseases of the face and ancient migraines, and for pain and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bleeding there is according to what I have recounted to you: so it is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named "fossori" and this is its shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point which is prominent at the head of the fossori above that vein and puncture on it with a slight or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some times it is opened by bleeding the lat, however it does not need to be of acute extremity like other bleedings, but rather from the lateral extremity, and bleeding that according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strong enough to break through it with the bleeding when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the bleeding of the two veins that are on the lacrimal ducts of two holes is for scabs of the eyes by reason of pain and sob in the eyes, and to the diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the bleeding is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and then you should be standing above it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And it is done the bleeding according to the transverse at a long length with a little blood, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bleeding is subtle, then forthwith the extremity of it is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then make the blood flow as much as is necessary to you, and pause on those spots, and strengthen them for one night, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the bleeding of the vein of the nose is corresponding to acute fever and intense sweating, and to diseases of the face and ancient migraines that occur on the face, and most particularly when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bleeding there is that the patient strengthens their neck and you take hold of your left hand with your right hand, and take the subtle bleeding instrument long and place it in the middle location of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear by sense perception here, and because the blood begins to flow at once.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It is necessary that you conclude your right hand with the bleeding instrument little by little and make the blood flow according to your necessity; and then bind it for one night, because it is restored a little more.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the purpose of the bleeding of the two guides is to relieve constriction and the beginning of leprosy, and to many diseases, impetigo, and bad ulcers that are corrosive like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the bleeding there is that the patient strengthens each one below in their neck with a bandage; and the artist stands above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then bleed the vein at length with an ample and small bleeding instrument little by little; and then extract blood according to seasonable quantity or as much as is necessary, and then make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the bandage and strengthen both veins with a middle-sized constriction so that the patient is not befuddled, and let it remain until morning when the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the purpose of bleeding the veins in the Algerich region is to cure small apostemes and pustules on the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are on the nose and in its circuit.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bleeding there is that you make the patient look at you, and strengthen their neck with a bandage, and then revolve their lips and regard the two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other is on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so because in the circuit of those veins are small black ones; and then you incise each one with an incised instrument.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are in doubt about which one is the correct one, and do not know which one of those is the true one, then take the incision of the largest of those, and the most manifest one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the same appearance as the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is customary to cut more when incising the two veins that are on the left lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But for the two veins that are on the left side of the tongue, the purpose is to bleed the cephalic vein in order to relieve symptoms that occur in the gullet, to treat the disease of the uvula, and to treat diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bleeding there is that you follow the patient between your eyes and in front of the sun, and lift up their tongue, and look down at their tongue, on one side of their vein and on the other side of their vein, and the color of each one declines to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bleed each one; and be careful not to conclude your right hand in bleeding those, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bled in the cleft are those in which costumarily flows in all men, and the bleeding of theirs is done according to two manners, or they put on the bleeding instrument a mirtillat or olivary one at subtlety declining; or cut off with a bleeding instrument a cullinary one, and call it thus, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnessil is that which corresponds to cutting and to those species of sides and subtle ones according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the constriction of these.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of bleeding with mirti:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	So the side of it is as follows: thus, it corresponds to opening the concave veins that are full and proceeding with apparent large ones, and to those which contain gross blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of bleeding with olivary:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bleeding is of smaller latitude and more subtle extremity, and corresponds to bleeding the subtle veins that contain subtle citrus-colored blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the purpose of bleeding the Basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is to extract blood from diseases that are below the gullet and the neck, and therefore to relieve the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And the bleeding operator should be careful when bleeding this, and be over-cautious in it, because below it is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the bleeding instrument, he will incise that artery and cause a flux of blood, for which reason it is necessary not to bleed this with a piercing instrument, but rather to cut with alnessil.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the Basilic vein does not appear in a manifest way, then it is necessary that you leave it and move to another, or seek out some branch of yours; or bleed at the end of the arm, where it is manifest; and cut it off with alnessil as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you wish to perform the bleeding on the median line, then it is necessary that you do so before the constriction of the arm that touches the location within which you know the location of the fingers, and approach placing your hand above with a tencha; and approach binding the arm and cutting off the vein with concave section using alnessil as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery at any distance from the location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you bleed, as you strengthen the bandage, swelling occurs in the location that you have marked with a tencha, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the bleeding like golden tears of an infant, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is from the artery; and therefore you should hold your breath and pause for a long time over that spot; and approach placing your hand on top of it, and if the blood is absconded, because many vessels are absconded, then you should strengthen the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch over the patient from the morning on, and be over-cautious of them and do not neglect that for some days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not absconded and you are not present to apply medicine, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is absconded; or that you take a poultice of fistula, and make it flow, and take one half of it and strengthen it over the location of the vein with constriction downwards with bandage and powder until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And therefore if the blood is absconded, it is good; and if not, then cure that with what preceded to the remembrance of the location of the powder-absorbing flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the absconding of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But the bleeding of the Vena Fusca is a purpose that extracts blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the chest; therefore it is composed of branches of the Basilic and Cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the bleeding operator should be over-cautious in the bleeding of this, because below it is a nerve; and therefore if he adjusts in the puncture of the bleeding instrument and finds the nerve, he will cause numbness to it, and it will be difficult to heal, and very likely it will not be fully healed. And this nerve many times appears to the sensation; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and does not show itself, then it is necessary that you pause the bleeding with the instrument with which you are bleeding with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your force.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should find the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of bleeding the Cephalic vein is to extract blood from the head and to relieve diseases of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is necessary to do so precisely, if you want to bleed with a piercing instrument, either with an olive-shaped one or a mirth-shaped one; because it is the safest of all veins, since there is neither artery nor nerve below.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But it is necessary for you to take care that with the bleeding instrument you do not puncture the top of the lacertus too much, and seek out the location where it is thinner, and do not touch it unless it is discovered through the first percussion which is above that location a few times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But often very many times, when it is not bled in the first percussion, the swelling does not appear until later.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the bleeding and its accidents are many, in which you must think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one is that which you should know: bleeding is not administered except for the preservation of health and by hope of recovery and caution against the event of diseases; and that bleeding should be done on one of the three veins in the armpit, namely: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, after a fast during spring and autumn, and in winter just before consumption, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it should be done bleeding at the third day or at the first moment that three hours have passed since sunrise.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But bleeding that is administered, it is when it provokes convenience and necessity for that, or at night or during the day, in any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that children not be bled until they are fourteen years old, and women should not be bled unless they have completed their fourteenth month after giving birth, and the elderly should not be bled if they have already passed one hundred years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when anyone wants to be bled in some way or other, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before the bleeding with a leon's clister, if there is a great fissure retained, so that the veins do not carry away the superfluous things from the bleeding of the bowels, which are pure, and thus not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not be bled if you are suffering from nausea and vomiting, or if you have a bad illness or intoxication, or if you have been drained of your strength and vitality, nor if you are afflicted with dropsy, nor yet if you should bleed due to colic passion, vomiting, or bowel distress, or if there is multiplication of coitus, travail, and exercise, or from fasting or vigilance, or for any reason that dissolves the virtue, whether bodily or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider the subtleties of airs and vapors before this if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And also enter into bath if no cause prohibits, or exercise through some exercise in order that the blood may be subtletized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the bleeding at noon, around the hour of tercia, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And force yourself to keep the peace in that day of all animal accidents, as is anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as is travail and excessive pain, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And have the same person make themselves present to the causes in the use of that which is customary among people, with aromaticity and odour, and with balms and similar things, according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the bleeding operator on a couch that is higher than the one on which the person to be bled should sit.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And also remove the person's arm, and wipe it with their own hand or with the bleeding operator's hands twice or three times; and then strengthen the bandage with a cord and wrap it around the area twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the constriction should be early, because the constriction when not equal or the constriction is with superfluity, then prohibits flows of blood; or it is with mollification, and then prohibits only the flowing of blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And also the constriction should be such that the person to be bled wipes their hands together between them until the veins are inflated and declared to the sense.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And also the bleeding operator should take a little bit of old olive oil and apply it to their own bleeding instrument; and then pause their left index finger on that vein, below the location where the bleeding is desired, so that the vein will flow a little bit, and the percussion will be settled, because the veins are like strings that flee from the bleeding instrument, and those are full of airiness, and when the bleeding operator pauses their instrument over that one, it becomes constricted, and the bleeding instrument falls away; and the vein is not filled, and if it is filled, then it is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary for the bleeding operator to be fixed and solicitous in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And also depause the bleeding instrument, but if the vein is huberta in one spot, then that's good; and otherwise, you should iterate this process on another spot nearby, or over it at a feast, if the location is not swollen.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is swollen or the disease is spreading, then you should leave it alone for a day or two and not tighten the bandage, because it may attract a swelling caution, nor enter into bathing.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And also iterate the bleeding procedure if needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the warning is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not yield the quantity of blood you desire, then you should iterate the bleeding procedure on that spot according to rectitude and adjust it slightly in the warning, and do so at a feast before the location becomes swollen, because in many men's bodies, the location becomes swollen with little warning.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if it has already become swollen, then do not iterate on it, because there is no excuse for you; and pause on some part of the oil's gash, because it relieves the blood's heart.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this location that you use olive oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer a gash of oil in all bleeding procedures where you bleed the veins according to the prohibition of blood's heart, and make it tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when one is paused on one of those spots over the location, because the blood is subtletized and revolved when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a great swelling is generated in the location of the bleeding, which often occurs, and especially to that person who has not been bled before, or in the warning of the vein being slight, then you should apply compresses, and pause on the spot with a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, until it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do this similarly with the sediment of blood from that vein, with the complement of either one or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in the location for some days with some blackness or greenish tint, do not worry about this; and if you wish, pause on that spot with some cause of aloen and mirra dissolved, or some cause of mentastre's sap or calament, or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often such swellings and elevations occur as a result of bleeding from the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore pause your hand over that spot, and if you find mollicia, then apply your compress on that spot, but if that eminence is bad and evil; and then be careful not to pause on that spot with any of the causes we have mentioned, because it may flow from the artery's blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an ointment with this on that spot where it is stiptic, so that the location may be tempered, and apply care to that spot with another cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract from the blood for every person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color that appears on top of the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then you should let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if it is thick, then you should let it flow out until it becomes subtletized; and similarly if it is sharp, until the acidity of it is removed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for that person who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting in one spot, to have the bleeding procedure of the vein amplified and the bleeding instrument made large.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that person who is frail, do the opposite of what was said before; and it is necessary to extract blood from them in multiple spots, and that the incision should be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best way that is administered in bleeding of vein is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of bleeding is saved from flow of blood and inflammation of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and more saving than bleeding according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which one is accustomed to occur syncope, it is necessary to perform the bleeding procedure after taking care of that person with a little bit of pa infused in vinegar of milgranas or simple oxymel scalded; and extract the blood in three or four sessions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a case of congestion or completion, then take care before the bleeding procedure by infusing pa in myrrh's essence or in aromatic honey with species such as pepper, cinnamon, gingerbread, and similar substances, or in aromatic essence with many odors.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs during bleeding, and it is the cause of excessive blood loss, then take care to drink water with beef broth and a subtle odorous essence; and use aromatics with a little bit of salt, and anoint your feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to eventuate their arm and dissolve their blood according to the second degree, must be done by one whose bleeding is for moderate evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, that evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But who wants to eventuate their arm and let out their blood according to the third degree, and whose body is strong, then do it about 7 or 8 hours after the first bleeding.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction of the part where it declines, then do it on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But in that body where there is already a lot of scalded and acidic blood that causes fever, it is necessary to extract the blood from one spot and let out a large quantity, and amplify the warning until syncope occurs; but you must have preserved all the conditions for bleeding; and pause your hand over the pulse of the blood in order to avoid death instead of syncope, because many times this happens when the bleeding operator is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not attempt to release the arm and evacuate the blood in the second degree when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it becomes difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press strongly on it with vehemence and bend it slightly outward, because this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it be until it is bloodletted secondarily; or remove this with the acidity of the bleeding that is coagulated in the orifice of the vein; or pause over that with tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress that with a light compression until the blood is outside.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is swollen, then let it be and don't touch it until the swelling subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity demands that you must evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then you should let out some blood from another location or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is bloodletted in the location of the fossa or basilica when it is not obstructed or hidden, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the bleeding procedure is that the patient inserts their hand into cold water until the finger becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And it should be made strong on that spot with a gentle pressure and mild constriction; and the bleeding procedure should be done transversely, not longitudinally nor according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let it be a broad warning and your bleeding procedure with which you bleed that spot at the joint of the hand, a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should insert your hand into cold water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your desired outcome.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from inserting your hand into cold water, and instead pause the blood's flow into cold water during the time of winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the bleeding procedure from this vein is more saving than from all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the bleeding procedure from the vein in the right arm is related to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of bleeding from this vein is that you should strengthen your hand with gentle pressure or with your own hand, more than you have put it in cold water, until the vein is inflated and clearly demonstrated; and then bleed transversely; and if it does not flow out well, do not hesitate to repeat.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And take care that you do not leave your hand in the bleeding procedure, because it is possible that the nerves of the fingers are exposed to the bone.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then insert your hand into cold water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not insert it into cold water, the blood will clot at the orifice of the vein, and the flow will be prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you should pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it will not be consolidated too quickly; and similarly, you should do this in every limb.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the bleeding procedure from the vein of the left arm is related to diseases of the gallbladder.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the bleeding procedure from this one, just as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the significance of the sephena vein in bloodletting is related to diseases that are located on the part behind the body, just as it is related to diseases of the hips, and retention of menstruation, and diseases of the lungs and ulcerous sores on the bones and joints of old age, and similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of bleeding from this vein is that the patient should insert their foot into cold water and make a friction on it until the veins appear; and then apply the ligature to the joint of the foot with a cord; and the location of the vein, when it becomes apparent, should be marked by the said toe, and from there it should ramify into the face of the foot like branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore bleed more abundantly from below the knee to above the ankle, and mark the spot with a knot, because it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you bleed from the face of the foot, then be careful not to touch the nerves that are located underneath it on the face of the foot; and pause your bleeding procedure with which you bleed transversely, as if you were going to cut into it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And may the bleeding be good.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you should insert the foot into cold water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bleeding operator makes a mistake in the first degree, then repeat the procedure with a little less force, because the spot is sensitive; and do not be afraid of the evil one, but rather beware of the nerves just as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do similarly with the sephena vein of the other foot as well.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the location as we have said should be marked below the socket of the wilderness partition.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the significance of bleeding from this vein is for sciatica when it is accompanied by bloody discharge.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of bleeding from this vein is that the patient should enter a bath, and hasten and strengthen the grip on the cuddy of the lathe above the ankle, up to four fingers' width, wrapped in a thin bandage, so that it does not appear except by means of this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore, when it appears, then you should bleed that vein according to each person's ability and according to the transverse direction, and it is better; or cut into it by incision or cut off a piece of it, because the spot is sensitive.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many men's veins that are somewhat meager; and if you find it, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then bleed some part of it, and it is that which appears on the two sides of the foot opposite the said auricular and anular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the constriction and pause over the spot of the bleeding cut, and strengthen the spot, because it will heal more quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	The art of ventilation and the qualities of using those [ventilation techniques].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilation is done with combs, or with horns, or with a very thin tube.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done in two ways: one of them is through scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation without scarification is done in two ways: one of them is with heat and the other is without heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And there are 14 locations in the body where ventilation is administered with scarification and blood extraction. One of these locations is alnocrati, which is located at the back of the head; and one half location on both sides of the neck; and ventozas of the mento below the mandible and below the mouth; and ventozas of two spatulas; and ventozas of alohoster, which is located at the end of the coccyx; and ventozas of two foetiles, which are located on both breasts; and ventozas of two cavities; and ventozas of two cuoysses.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood, but rather from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not counteract the virtue through those [small veins], just as it is counteracted through bleeding; nor is it necessary to perform ventilation with or without heat in any illness caused by repletion until the entire body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity demands it for illness or for continuity, administer that [ventilation] at the beginning of each month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at any other time as needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that some men have blood multiplied within them, demanding extraction through ventilation and finding graveza and soda in their head; and those who find replecio and rigor in their face and head, and in their neck; and those who find pruishment in their face and forehead, and tenebrosity and hebetut in their eyes; and those whose ventozacio is located elsewhere; and those whose laughter is multiplied; and those who find a taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is apostemated and spits up blood; and those whose sleep is multiplied, and those who see blood in their dreams, along with other causes similar to these.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, when one is in some cause of those [symptoms], and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command that ventilation be done more than usual two or three hours after day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the significance of ventoziation on the back of the neck is that when it converges with gravity in the head and causes it to sink into the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by complete evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventozation is located at the site of bleeding from the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not permitted to use that which is of complete complexity, or in one who has catarrh, because it gives great harm to him.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it is not necessary to use that [method] on the old, and in those whose heads are diseased.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to one who is continuously experiencing it [ventoziation] on his head, forgetfulness ensues; and therefore you must command the ventozator to pause for a little while at the partitions below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventoziation of alkahel is in the location of bleeding from the vena fusca and basilica; and therefore it converges with asthma, constriction of the lungs, splitting of the lung's substance, and coughing, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary to moderate the alkahel ventozation a little bit, because if it is paused below, it will generate weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventoziation of alhagdahan converges with accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, emigration, preoccupation, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is located at the site of bleeding from the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is necessary to command the ventozator not to press their hand with scarification, so that the artery does not get injured and blood flow does not occur.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventoziation below the mento converges with ulcers in the mouth, corruption of the gingiva, and similarities to those diseases that are present in the mouth; and it is located at the site of bleeding from the aliheric which is present on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventoziation that is done on both spatulas converges with caphatan, which is caused by repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventoziation of both sides of the foetiles converges with the bleeding from three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, because it attracts blood from all those smaller veins that are present in the flesh, and those small veins which are connected to other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventozator not to proceed with excessive scarification, because the location is stripped of flesh and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventozation with which one is ventozated on the ashosses and converges with hemorrhoids of the rectum and ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is necessary to command the ventozator to be a great ventozation, and of earth, because the location requires strong section; and the thin ventozas are pierced and scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But the ventozations of the knees are very subtle and manifestly so, because they attract blood from all over the body, and converge with ancient pains of the throat and lungs, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and converge with bothor and ademil; and they are located at the site of bleeding from two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they make the entire body tremble and cause syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the significance of the alahorcoben ventozations is proportional to the significance of the ventozations on both knees.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the ventozations is that one pauses the ventozation at first glance and sucks it in with a gentle suction, and does not prolong the position of the ventozations, but rather pauses them slightly and remains them quietly, allowing the humors to come to the location by gradual arrival.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease iterating this and continuing until you see the location already redden and inflate, and that the rigor of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should scarify and iterate the suction gradually, and approximately consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that person who has tender skin and few pores, you should only scarify him once and not again, so that the location is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the ventozator to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and then apply the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thickened, then it is necessary to scarify twice, because in the first instance, the way of subtlety is opened up for the blood and its quality is improved.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second [incision], one must seek out the acquired knowledge of the extraction of thickened blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul-smelling, then it is necessary to make a third scarification so that it can be finally cleared.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood gradually or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we must scarify with a lot of scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify by making a deep incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which lies the depth of the coding so only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one whose code is thick, hard, and black, and his pores are tight, it is necessary that the locations of the ventoses be anointed with gentle, open, and resolving oils; if it is in the summer, like oil of aloen or oil of violet, or oil of amellas dossas, or oil of cemensa de coja; and if it is in the winter, then one must use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is great, then one must prepare it with oil of marantic, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloen, or oil of anethi, and to those similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the ventozator is of wide pores and tender skin, it is necessary that it be forbidden to use oil, and it is necessary that the locations of the ventozas, near to the ventozation, be washed with icy water or cold water from a spring, or cold water from a well, or cold water from a river, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that person whose blood is of great humidity, washes his ventozas with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And that person whose superfluities are great, washes his ventozas with ancient vinegar, or water of sansuc (majorama), or decoction of aneth, or of camomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that the ventozation be kept before bath; having to be administered in proportion to the bath for one hour or two, and to sleep after the ventozation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that ought to be regulated before ventosation, namely the sand of the winds or the blood-letting instrument.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is necessary to consider at first: if the ventozator or one who should be bleeding is choleric and vents over his blood being hot and inflamed, then it is necessary that he take cooling causes, such as vinegar of milligranas, and endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, and similar to those.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause from their foods such as pullets, and meats of hawks serving, and foods conditioned with vinegar, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for that person whose complexion is hot, it is necessary that he drink essence of almiva or essence of alsecanabin from semensas, and sumac, and a strong-smelling mixture between yew and holly; and that he be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and refrain from eating the foods of pullets and canabir and pheasants and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of ventozation and blood-letting, drink should be greater than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary that it be given to drink in some hours to certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musc, as muscadine, or alcelita before the ventozation or before blood-letting, or nearby, so that the main members may be comforted and that the blood may be subtletized; and it is not necessary for them to take those scalding things.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the ventozas that are suitable for scarification are those that are paused over the liver, and on the hip and podagra, and on the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the pubic region, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those [ventozas] but rather attraction of blood from the member, such as pausing a ventosa over the nipple in illness of flux of blood from the nose; and using that to dissolve ventosity cold and viscous from the member, just as one pauses on the belly and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and cools it down and removes the pain which resolves ventosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is paused over the tonsils when they become obstructed or swollen, because by virtue of attraction, a strong and light [action] opens up obstruction and eradicates the swelling from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it does when paused over the liver and gallbladder, as ventosity is released in those enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventozas are administered slowly with suction, and some times they are administered with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some times they are administered full of hot water in the illnesses of the gallbladder.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And thus it is that the ventozas are filled and made greater, as it is with hot water alone or with water in which certain herbs have been steeped according to their convenience.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of ventozas administered with heat: the diameter of the orifice should be about two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon should be half a palm; and it should be in the left side, in the location that is in the circuit, one quarter of the whole, the channel being small according to the quantity that an awl can enter.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made of earthenware or citrus, with thick margins, lion-like and evenly distributed, for the purpose that it does not impede the member from taking its position on top.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should have a middle part of earthenware or iron, where a cross-shaped candle is placed with the heat.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ventozas is greater in size than the one we have recommended; and the small addition to it, according to the illnesses and state of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventosas of the old and exhausted are different from those of the young and robust.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this ventozas with heat on the member is that it extends the ember with decent wood, gradually in front of a small candle made of wax, and places it on the middle of the cross-shaped part in the middle location of the ventozas, so that the fire may be lit around the left side, so that it does not burn the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed on the member of the patient, and the said [ember] should be placed on the channel that we have mentioned, until when we have the ventozas and do not need to open the said [channel] and allow the vapor to rise over that channel, then the ventozas will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And properly ignite the ember according to its manner, and iterate it if you need it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in ventosa that is administered for the illness of pleurisy, with water, where there is no cross-shaped part nor channel, and it is not administered except when it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this ventozas the more it is large, the better it is, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capítulo XCIV.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not administered on small members, but on those in which it is not possible to place ventosas, due to their smallness, such as the palate and gingiva, and similar to them; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the tongue and nose, and similar to them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found sanguisugas which are in the waters of purest poverty.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And accordingly, let the day and night be spent in water purification until they are famished, and that there be no cause remaining in the belly of those [sanguisugas]; and accordingly, let the body be evacuated by blood-letting and ventozas; and accordingly, let the member of the patient be fregued until it becomes red; and accordingly, let them be placed on top.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and coagulated.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suction the place with a ventozas, it is more beneficial in judgment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, let the place be washed with vinegar and water, and then be rubbed and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood is prolonged in the body near the confluence of the sanguisuguas, and it flows out, then you should immerse a cloth in cold water, and place that on top until the discharge has stopped.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then you should powder vitriol, or guallas and similar substances to them of stiptical causes, on top until the blood is absorbed; or let the most abundant fava beans be placed on the spot, and left there until they stick to the place, and the blood is absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if needed, iteration of sanguisuguas, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the sanguisuguas are prohibited from suspension, then you should rub the place with recent blood or leave an awl in the area until blood flows; and accordingly, let them be placed, for those which feel any blood soon become attached.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when they fall out, powder a little bit of alum, or salt, or ash, on them, and then cauterize.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And so begins the process of the third part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, understand that foolish doctors and ordinary people and those who do not look at the books of the Ancients for a long time, nor read one letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And because of this reason, it is made that the manner of the sages on earth is private; and you, oh son, do not forget to keep in mind that I have forgotten nothing from my studies over a long period of time; and I have not added anything new, but rather through the length of my reading of the books of the Ancients and study of their understanding, I have extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And accordingly, I have directed my attention to experimentation and study throughout the length of my own life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And you have already been described in this chapter all that contains my science and on which I have passed the best experiment; therefore, I have abridged it for you others and delivered it from occupation of elongation; and I have abridged it at the end of abridgment; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed many forms of instruments that are administered in that, as it is made by addition of declaration, just like I did in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Capítulo Primero.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the fracture of bones, from which a preliminary statement is necessary, before we begin to recall the members of fractures and diverse ones of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us now say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters according to the understanding of which in the beginning the craftsmen are forced to stand still upon the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others of yours.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when accidents occur to any fracture or dislocation or twisting or falling, then it is necessary that you take care at the beginning with blood-letting or binding it up, or some other remedy, if there is no prohibitive cause, such as debility of virtue, or whether it be the one who has fallen, or old in decrepitude, or when it is time for vehement heat, or for vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And accordingly, be content with your own food of fresh herbs and birds' flesh and crab meat; and prohibit thick meats and fill up only with viands and all viand that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of avoiding apoplectic caution, and if not, fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his original regimen, with which he is accustomed to live.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods of great and heavy substance, with viscosity, such as bread cooked in water, rice, caps, peas, beef, and fresh vegetables, and thick and similar foods to those, and under this regimen, coagulation of fracture occurs more easily and kindly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones are brittle when they are in old men who are in their prime and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continuous and consolidated according to their nature because of the drying up of the members of theirs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying up of those members, and they continue and consolidate those that are of theirs in the end of childhood, just like the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and connects on the broken bone of all parts some similar cause to glue in which growth is thickened that adheres and strengthens it until it is conglutinated and tied together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, just like fire at the beginning, until no cause prevents it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, just as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A great diversity of fractures according to the diversity of members.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of members, because a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the arm bone; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you will find in recollection of all the species of fracture, exposed in its own chapter distinct from others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great diversity of fracture in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of bone are diversified in their own kind; for there is curved fracture and another that occurs at the stars; and some times there is fracture according to the length of the bone: and so are the fractures of the satagia and astelhas and addictions proceeding and not-proceeding, just as it is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and there is fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and there is fracture fissure small.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for all species, there is a proper way or torment in its restoration, according to the distinct memory of it in its own places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A great sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And thus it is known that bone fracture exists: there is twisting of the limb, and that elevation and prominence of the limb to the sense, and thus when you compress that with your mother's hands.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the location nor is it made of a deviation, and you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not here a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is twisting or small fissure, and then you should not press too hard with your mother's hands and with compression from all sides. Having pause over the location of medicines which bring remembrance of those things fitting for that moment to which they are suitable; and be strict by subtle structure.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the location when it is curved and not split into two or another which does not occur in the satagia, as is remade all part of its comparison, then you should begin from your hour to rectification having that to happen apoplectic caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if apoplectic caution occurs to it, then you should leave that alone for some days until the apoplectic caution ceases; and as soon as it ceases, apply something else according to each manner by which you can lift and guide.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that restoration of it and setting of it is more easy than the bone in which satagie occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And as soon as possible, strengthen it according to what will come to mind.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there are satagias, then it is necessary to extend this broken member by two parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your mother's hands if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be your position such that you pause the member at the location where it is naturally extended, while the parts are stretched out of the broken member, then you must force yourself to make those additions return to their places with gentle and according to each manner by which you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care that according to your strength you do not occur over the patient because of your operation or injury; and force yourself according to your power that you apply one bone to another, their companion, according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that in that hour you touch with your mother's hands, and if times there is some different cause, correct that and guide that by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as foolish surgeons who many times cause apoplectic caution by their operation, or cause contraction in the member, just as we have seen for the operation of theirs.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And accordingly, connect and equalize the member, and perform a decent operation and structure of that member; and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make him avoid causing harm to himself in the hour of his vigilance and sleep, and see his revolution and agitation, and observe his urination, and note all his movements with all his virtue; and wait until the position of the member is such that it is assured pain-free, which occurs when one feels in the disposition of the position of the member's love or injury; then you should change that to another disposition of this kind where he does not feel pain; and take care that the position of lu is straight and equal, so that the member does not become twisted when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; for you know that the broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, such as the arm and hand and foot, it is necessary that the envelopment be with a cloth very soft and subtle.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are large, such as the chest or thigh, it is necessary that in those there be a wrapping of cloth broad and hard, for the broad wrapping connects the great member and strengthens all parts with equal structure, so that in it no stain enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And accordingly, when you begin, start your equalization process, and pause conveniently at that point, over the location of that fracture with three or four envelopments according to what the member requires; and strengthen your hand a little with the bond.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And accordingly, see to it that the wrapping reaches as far as the superior part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen more than not, so that your structure does not fail with the which you have strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And accordingly, stretch yourself with the envelopment of the location of the fracture a little, and soften the structure gradually, until you take from the location a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And accordingly, take another bandage and wrap it around the location of the fracture with envelopment, and accordingly see to it that the wrappings reach as far as the part left of the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the wrapping and in softening that according to what we have said above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And accordingly, pause between the wrappings of stopper or cloth with which the twisting of the fracture is equalized, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not pause at all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And accordingly, pause over the other bandage, and accordingly, equalize on these star-shaped wrappings as well-made as they are, if there is no inflammation or apoplectic caution in the location, and then pause over that which seats the apoplectic caution and prevents the inflammation; and leave it for some days; and then you should strengthen over the stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the stars should be made of the best cane reed, and be formed wisely; or of palm tree wood; or of sedge palm leaves; and the width of each star should be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	And it is necessary that the star-shaped wrapping that is paused over that fracture be larger and thicker by a little than the other star-shaped wrappings, and the length of the star should be according to what is measured by the member in magnitude and smallness; and accordingly, strengthen over the stars with another bandage according to your first structure; and accordingly, tie above with a faithful decentment according to what we have said about structure, and it is that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture more, and as much as it extends from the fracture, so much less is the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be gentle in thickness and subtlety, and be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of certain foolish people who pause their threads with cords of twisted silk, and it is a great error, when one takes the structure out of equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And accordingly, fine threads are not convenient, for you will not consecrate by structure with those as you wish, and it is not necessary that between star-shaped wrapping and star-shaped wrapping there be more than one finger's breadth.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stars near the structure in their places, then pause behind those with a stopper made of lion's mane or woolen yarn until this does not cause him injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some times fractures are accompanied by a wound, and disruption occurs in the bone code, and you will come to remembrance of that in the capital according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken members are set with stars on the first day; the reason is that the member, when it is large, does not need to be paused over by stars for seven days or more, according to your safety in the advent of apoplectic caution.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the emplasters with which the Ancients restored, those that are paused over fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of emplastering like a gentle breeze of restoration for fracture, suitable for many complexions and especially for women and children, because it is from there that no wind blows nor does it freeze: and it is that you take the powder of millstone, and it is the pulp of the flour that results from the movement of the millstone in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And comforts that one as it is, but not in the same way that you sift it with album of wheat, and pause the making of it not too dense or subtle; and accordingly use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsion: recipe of assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and mugwort, which is the root of sage, one dragon's weight; myrrh and aloes, one dragon's weight five; alochil, twenty dragon's weights; all are mixed together with aloe water or album of hen, if the patient's complexion is scarred; and then use this plaster, because it has good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives strength to men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster which gives strength to fractures and torsion: recipe of mugwort and white aloes, one dragon's weight ten; myrrh and aloes, one dragon's weight five; acacia, six dragon's weights; Armenian bole, twenty dragon's weights.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The final instructions in our medieval medicine recipe!
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Another method of emplastering!
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	The final passage in this medieval medical text!
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of emplastering!
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A concise method of emplastering! The final instructions!
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	The final instruction!
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of emplastering!
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	The final passage!
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	The final passage!
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Another method of emplastering!
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The final passage!
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	The final instruction!
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	The final instructions!
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final instruction!
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	The final passage!
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	The final instruction! The final instruction!
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	The final instruction!
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	The final instruction!
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	The final passage!
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	The final passage!
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	A new chapter in the medieval medical text!
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	It seems like we're diving into the specifics of head fractures!
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	Another interesting passage!
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	More insight into the types of head fractures!
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	Another fascinating passage!
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Another passage that's giving me some serious medieval medical vibes!
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	The final sentence of the passage!
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	The final sentence of the text!
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	The final sentence!
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	The final sentence!
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The final sentence of the text!
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	The final passage of the text!
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	The final sentence!
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The final sentence!
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	The final sentence!
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	The final sentence!
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	The final sentence!
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	The final sentence!
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	The final sentence!
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first of the two methods of operation!
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	The second of the two methods of operation!
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	The final passage!
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	The final sentence!
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	The final sentence!
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	The final sentence!
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	The final sentence!
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	The final passage!
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	The final passage!
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	The final sentence!
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	The final sentence!
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	The final sentence!
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The second method of operation!
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The final passage!
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	The final passage!
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	The final passage!
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	The final passage!
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	The final sentence!
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	The final sentence!
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	The final sentence!
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	The final sentence!
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	The final passage!
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	The final passage!
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	The final sentence!
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	The final sentence!
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	The final sentence!
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence! The final sentence!
Capitol .iii.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	A new topic!
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Fascinating!
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	A medieval medical procedure!
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	A warning!
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	A detailed description!
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	A general guideline!
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	A treatment plan!
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	A creative solution!
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	A creative fix!
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	A surprising twist!
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	The final word!
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	A final caution!
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	A final piece of advice!
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	The final advice!
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	The final sentence!
Capitol .iiii.	A new chapter!
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	A new topic!
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	A nuanced approach!
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	A clever technique!
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	A delicate procedure!
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	A delicate procedure!
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	The final advice!
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	The final act!
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	The final act!
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	The final caution!
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	The final consideration!
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	The final consideration!
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	The final step!
Capitol .v.	A new chapter!
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	A new topic!
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	A new development!
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	The nuances of fracture classification!
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	The surgical procedure!
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	The final step!
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	The final touches!
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	The final challenge!
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The final touches!
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	The delicate touch!
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The surgical tool!
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	The shape of the instrument!
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the instrument!
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	The aftermath of the procedure!
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	The gentle approach!
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	The treatment of infection!
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The treatment of a fractured clavicle!
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	The importance of frequent checks!
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	The importance of proper sleeping posture!
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	The timing of removing the splint!
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	The importance of dressing changes!
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	The timeline for healing!
Capitol .vi.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The title of the manuscript!
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The conclusion of the manuscript!
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	The importance of gentle manipulation!
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	The application of dressings and splints!
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	The shaping of the splint!
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	The importance of proper splinting and immobilization!
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	The importance of regular dressing changes and splint adjustments!
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	The final instructions!
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The timeline for recovery!
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	The final stages of treatment!
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	The final steps of treatment!
Capitol .vii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	A new topic!
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The complexity of foot fractures!
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	The painful and distressing symptoms of foot fractures!
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The art of gentle manipulation!
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	The art of gentle wrapping and securing!
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	The art of gentle correction!
Capitol .viii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	A new topic!
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	The anatomy of broken ribs!
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The importance of careful observation!
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The importance of gentle treatment!
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	The complications of broken ribs!
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The ancient wisdom of the Antics!
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	The ancient wisdom of the Antics!
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	The importance of caution!
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	The dangers of overconfidence!
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	The art of gentle wrapping!
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	The importance of careful observation!
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	The art of wound care!
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	The treatment of abscesses!
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	The importance of rest!
Capitol .ix.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The treatment of fractures in the spine!
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	The complexity of spinal fractures!
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	The importance of careful observation and diagnosis!
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	The signs of recovery!
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	The importance of careful observation!
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	The gravity of the situation!
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	The power of gentle treatment!
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of abscesses!
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	The importance of rest and relaxation!
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	The treatment of bone fractures!
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	The treatment of complex fractures!
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	The importance of proper wound care!
Capitol .x.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de la ancha.	The treatment of hernias!
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The anatomy of hernias!
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The treatment of hernias!
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	The correction of hernias!
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	The preparation for hernia correction!
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	The application of dressings and splints!
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The application of splints and the importance of proper rest!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	The treatment of abscesses!
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	The treatment of broken bones!
Capitol .xi.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	The treatment of fractures!
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori!
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	The treatment of fractured adjutori!
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The application of splints!
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The treatment of fractured adjutori!
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	The treatment of fractured adjutori!
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The treatment of fractured adjutori!
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	The treatment of fractured adjutori!
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	The treatment of fractured adjutori!
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	The treatment of fractured adjutori!
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	The application of splints!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	The treatment of abscesses!
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The application of pressure!
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	The application of pressure to the adjutori!
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	The use of splints!
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	The use of splints!
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	The application of pressure!
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The importance of proper application!
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The relationship between fracture length and strictura application!
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	The final steps!
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	The importance of patience!
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	The importance of proper bandaging!
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	The importance of patience!
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The position of the patient!
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	The importance of proper positioning and support!
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	The importance of proper nutrition and hydration!
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The importance of gradual strengthening and rehabilitation!
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	The importance of patience and cautious rehabilitation!
Capitol .xii.	It seems that we have reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	The title of the next chapter!
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Anatomy of the arm!
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	Fractures in the arm!
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	Treatment of a fracture in the small focus (focil petit)!
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	Treatment of a fracture in the larger focus (focil major)!
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	The worst-case scenario: when both bones are broken at the same time!
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	The importance of proper treatment and alignment!
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	The importance of proper alignment and pressure!
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	The importance of strong immobilization!
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	The importance of proper positioning and support!
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	The importance of proper support and comfort!
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The importance of proper positioning and support!
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	The importance of proper alignment and reduction!
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	The importance of gentle pressure and patience!
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	The importance of gentle pressure and patience when dealing with sharp edges or spurs!
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	The importance of addressing wounds and infections in fracture treatment!
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	The importance of proper wound care and treatment!
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The importance of understanding the types and numbers of splints used in arm fractures!
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	The importance of proper splinting and alignment!
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The importance of gentle and moist wrapping!
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	The importance of careful consideration and observation!
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	The importance of prompt intervention and cooling!
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	The importance of gentle handling and reapplication!
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	The importance of careful evaluation and correction!
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	The importance of nutrition and circulation!
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	The importance of not rushing the healing process!
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	The importance of gentle movement and rest!
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	The importance of understanding the healing process!
Capitol .xiii.	The conclusion!
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	The final topic: restoration of fracture of the little finger and its digits!
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	The importance of gentle handling!
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	The importance of proper positioning!
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The importance of proper alignment and reduction!
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	The importance of proper splinting and wrapping!
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	The importance of proper wrapping and compression!
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The importance of proper application and pressure!
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	The importance of proper splinting and alignment!
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	The importance of proper alignment and elevation!
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	The importance of proper alignment and fixation!
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	The importance of considering various scenarios!
Capitol .xiv.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	The final topic!
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The importance of proper alignment and positioning!
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The importance of proper positioning and support!
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The importance of proper alignment and extension!
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	The importance of proper alignment and extension (contd.)!
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	The importance of proper alignment and extension (contd.)!
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The importance of proper alignment and reduction!
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	The importance of proper wound care!
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The importance of proper bandaging and wrapping!
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	The importance of proper wrapping and positioning!
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	The importance of proper positioning and support!
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	The importance of proper padding and compression!
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	The importance of proper splinting and compression!
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	The importance of proper extension and strengthening!
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	The importance of proper care and attention!
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	The importance of proper alignment and correction!
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	The importance of proper alignment and adjustment!
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	The importance of proper rehabilitation and physical therapy!
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	The importance of proper healing time and consideration!
Capitol .xv.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	The restoration of fractures in the hip joint!
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	The importance of early treatment for hip fractures!
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	The importance of proper diagnosis and treatment!
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The process of restoring the hip joint!
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	The use of splints and bandages!
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	The importance of considering all possible scenarios!
Capitol .xvi.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	The restoration of fractures in the femur!
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	The anatomy of the femur!
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	The treatment of fractures in the femur!
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	The consequences of misaligned bones!
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	The importance of proper alignment!
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	The importance of proper alignment!
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	The importance of proper alignment and stability!
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	The importance of gentle and gradual rehabilitation!
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	The process of surgical intervention!
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	The wrapping process!
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	The placement of splints!
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	The use of a splint to prevent movement!
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	The importance of prompt treatment!
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	The importance of regular monitoring and treatment!
Capitol .xvii.	The final chapter!
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	The fracture of the ankle and foot bones!
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The likelihood of fractures in the ankle and foot bones!
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	The treatment of foot bone fractures!
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	The process of realigning and stabilizing the foot bones!
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	The application of an emplastre and the placement of two small plates!
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	The importance of proper wrapping and stabilization!
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	The importance of monitoring and re-evaluating the injury!
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	The process of treating and re-attaching digits!
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	The process of re-attaching and stabilizing a detached digit!
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	The process of re-attaching and stabilizing multiple detached digits!
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	The importance of considering all possible causes and factors!
Capitol .xviii.	The final chapter!
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	The fracture of the hip joint!
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	The process of treating a fractured hip joint!
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The process of treating a fractured hip joint (continued)!
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	The process of treating a fractured hip joint (continued)!
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	The duration of treatment!
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	The use of an ovela sac and a reed tube to treat a fractured hip joint!
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	The treatment process concludes!
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	The conclusion of the text!
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	The conclusion of the text!
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	The treatment of a fractured spine in men!
Capitol .xix.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	The treatment of fractures with wounds!
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	The importance of considering the complexity of the fracture and wound!
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	The importance of controlling bleeding and promoting clotting!
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	The importance of prompt treatment and prevention of complications!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	The importance of caution when dealing with abscesses!
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	The importance of reducing and realigning a fractured bone!
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	The use of a metal instrument for reducing and realigning fractures!
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	The importance of precision and gentle manipulation when using the metal instrument!
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	The importance of careful attention to the shape and curvature of the bone!
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	The conclusion!
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	The translation of the title!
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	The importance of proper positioning!
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	The process of realignment and stabilization!
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	The importance of carefully aligning the fractured bone!
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	The importance of flexibility and adaptability in reducing fractures!
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	The importance of careful attention to small details!
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	The importance of monitoring the patient's condition after reduction!
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The importance of proper wound care and dressing!
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	The importance of proper wound closure and dressing!
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	The importance of careful caution to avoid causing further harm!
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	The characteristics of a minor fracture!
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	The importance of proper wound care and dressing!
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	The importance of monitoring wound healing and administering medication!
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	The importance of monitoring wound healing and ensuring proper consolidation!
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	The importance of monitoring wound healing and addressing concerns!
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	The importance of carefully removing and extracting foreign objects!
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	The importance of addressing wound complications!
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	The importance of proper surgical technique and caution! The importance of proper wound care!
Capitol .xx.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	A new chapter!
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	The importance of treating swelling after a fracture!
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	The treatment of swelling after a fracture!
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	The importance of carefully managing swelling after a fracture!
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The importance of addressing severe swelling after a fracture!
Capitol .xxi.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	The importance of restoring a fractured bone to its natural state!
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	The importance of addressing various factors that can impede the restoration of a fractured bone!
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The importance of nutrition and relaxation in the healing process!
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	The importance of proper wound care and nutrition in promoting healing!
Capitol .xxii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The importance of proper care for broken bones!
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	The importance of proper care for a restored limb!
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	The consequences of poor medical care!
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	The use of herbal remedies and poultices to treat swelling and bruising!
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	The importance of gentle massage and movement in physical therapy!
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	The importance of careful consideration and planning in surgical procedures!
Capitol .xxiii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De sermo en dislocacio.	It seems we've reached a new topic!
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	The consequences of dislocation!
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	The importance of prompt reduction in the case of a dislocation!
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	The importance of prompt action in reducing dislocation!
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	The importance of gentle and careful manipulation in reducing dislocation!
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	The importance of thorough care for the affected limb!
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	The conclusion of the text!
Capitol .xxiiii.	It seems that we're reaching the final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	The final chapter!
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The final chapter is wrapping up!
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	The final conclusion!
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	The importance of prompt reduction in the case of a complete dislocation!
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The final instructions!
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	The importance of gentle manipulation and evaporation!
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	The final steps!
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	The final instructions!
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	The final emphasis on gentle care!
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	The consequences of failed reduction!
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	The dire consequences of failed reduction!
Capitol .xxv.	The final chapter!
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The final chapter!
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula and its attachments!
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The final steps of treatment!
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	The final step in treatment!
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	The final touch!
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The conclusion!
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	The final advice!
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	The final touch!
Capitol .xxvi.	The final chapter!
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	The final topic!
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	The three ways of muscle dislocation!
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second way of muscle dislocation!
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The tendency of muscle dislocation!
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	The consequences of muscle dislocation!
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	The final advice!
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The final revelation!
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	The final warning!
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	The key to successful treatment!
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The final steps of treatment!
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	The treatment continues!
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The final steps of treatment!
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	The art of muscle reduction!
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	The importance of gentle treatment!
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The art of gentle reduction!
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	The art of gentle reduction!
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	The art of gentle reduction!
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	The art of gentle reduction!
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	The art of gentle reduction!
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	The final steps of treatment!
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	The importance of gentle treatment!
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The power of gentle exercise!
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	The treatment of dislocated joints!
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	The consequences of neglect!
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The reduction of a dislocated joint!
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The administration of another stricture!
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	The use of baths to alleviate gravity and promote natural movement!
Capitol .xxvii.	The next chapter in our medieval medical text!
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	The treatment of a dislocated joint in the hip!
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The complexity of hip joint dislocation!
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	The importance of prompt reduction and treatment!
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The process of restoring a dislocated hip joint!
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	The process of reducing a anterior hip joint dislocation!
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	The use of forceful extension to reduce a stubborn dislocation!
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	The use of two assistants to apply forceful extension!
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	The wrapping of the arm with cloth!
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	The use of oil to facilitate joint movement!
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	The post-reduction care and treatment!
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	The removal of the bandage and support!
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	The use of repeated applications and extension!
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	The use of gentle massage and compression to alleviate discomfort!
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	The use of gentle heat and massage to promote recovery!
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred on the inside of the wound, up to the point where it is linen-covered.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	The use of a cow's hide to promote healing!
Capitol .xxviii.	A new chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The treatment of a wrist dislocation!
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The importance of prompt reduction in wrist dislocations!
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The process of reducing a wrist dislocation!
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Additional considerations for wrist dislocation reduction!
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	The importance of patience and gentle treatment!
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	The importance of considering the wrist's natural anatomy!
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	The post-treatment care for wrist dislocation!
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	The treatment of wrist dislocation-related stiffness!
Capitol .xxix.	A new chapter!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The treatment of finger dislocations!
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	The frequency of finger dislocations!
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	The reduction of finger dislocations!
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	The post-reduction care for finger dislocations!
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	The importance of gradual extension!
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	The importance of consistent treatment and exercise!
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	The treatment of wrist dislocations!
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	The importance of consistent treatment across different areas!
Capitol .xxx.	The final chapter!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The treatment of dislocations in the neck!
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	The gravity of a neck or spine dislocation!
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The consequences of a severe neck or spine dislocation!
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	The consequences of a severe neck or spine dislocation: gelbozitation!
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of gelbozitation: a dire prognosis!
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	The conclusion: a summary of the treatment methods!
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	The final verdict: no hope for recovery!
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The only hope for recovery!
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The patient's position: lying down to facilitate healing!
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	The use of props to facilitate healing!
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The use of props to maintain proper alignment!
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The use of straps to secure the patient's body!
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The importance of securing the straps firmly!
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The use of force and pressure to realign the spine!
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	The use of a table to realign the spine!
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The use of the table to apply gentle pressure!
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	The preparation of the bed for the patient!
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	The placement of the supporting stick!
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	The shape of the supporting sticks!
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The securing of the straps!
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	The final steps in the treatment!
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	The final step: the description of the turntable!
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	The application of the poultice!
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	The conclusion!
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	The final warning and recommendation!
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	The warning against improper treatment!
Capitol .xxxi.	We're moving on to a new chapter!
De curacio de anca dislocada.	A new chapter on treating a dislocated hip!
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	The importance of understanding the anatomy!
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The different types of hip joint dislocations!
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The most common type of hip joint dislocation!
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The signs of a posterior hip joint dislocation!
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The signs of an anterior hip joint dislocation!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The signs of an anterior hip joint dislocation!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The signs of a posterior hip joint dislocation!
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The importance of considering the duration and severity of a dislocation!
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	The treatment of recent dislocations!
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	The treatment of stubborn dislocations!
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The extension of the affected leg!
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The extension of all these into one moment!
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	The common extension!
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	The importance of proper treatment!
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	The reduction of the dislocation!
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	The second strong minister!
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	The ease of this type of treatment!
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	The importance of patient cooperation!
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	The measurement and extension of the affected leg!
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The suspension and length measurement of the affected leg!
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The use of young men to manipulate the pelvis and hip joint!
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	The reduction of the dislocation in the outer direction!
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	The use of two beams and a wet cloth to prevent discomfort!
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	The final stages of the reduction!
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	The importance of proper technique!
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	The patient's position!
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	The treatment of anterior dislocations!
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	The treatment of posterior dislocations!
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	The application of compression!
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	The final stages of the reduction!
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	The final check-up!
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	The final confirmation!
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	The aftercare!
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	The final recovery instructions!
Capitol .xxxii.	The final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	The chapter on the cure of dislocation of the ankle!
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle is dislocated in three ways!
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of ankle dislocation!
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of ankle dislocation!
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of reduction!
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	The final steps!
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	The final instructions!
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	The exception!
Capitol .xxxiii.	The final chapter!
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	The chapter on the cure of dislocation of the ankle!
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle's complexities!
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of ankle dislocation!
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure for ankle dislocation!
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	The treatment for significant ankle dislocations!
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	The correct positioning of the assistant!
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	The reduction technique!
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	The final step!
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	The final push!
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	The importance of confirmation!
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	The importance of caution!
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The importance of external support!
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The importance of careful alignment!
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	The final stages of reduction!
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	The importance of gentle handling!
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	The importance of rest and gentle manipulation!
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	The importance of gradual recovery!
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	The importance of patience and proper recovery!
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	The importance of proper wound care!
Capitol .xxxiiii.	The final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The chapter on curing dislocations of the little toes!
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The importance of gentle manipulation!
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	The importance of proper positioning!
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	The importance of gentle manipulation!
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	The importance of immobilization and rest!
Capitol .xxxv.	The final chapter!
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	The types of dislocations!
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	The importance of timely treatment!
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	The importance of humility and compassion!
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	The importance of prompt treatment!
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	The importance of proper wound care!
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	The importance of treating compound fractures!
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	The importance of humility and devotion!
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	The final sentence!
Amen.	The classic Christian blessing!
