Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the remedies of Albucazim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, to complete its consequence in it, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you have fulfilled that for you at this treatise, which is a part of my operation with my own hand, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the operation with my own hand has been spread throughout our region and in our time, all private; so that few people have perused the science of it, and its vision is lost; and there remain no remnants of it except some petty descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the waters and lead to those errors and hesitations until the intentions of it are closed and its force is elongated.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you will vivify this order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you come to the forms of the ferraments of cautery and other instruments of the work as it is for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why no artificial limb has been found in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it covers the skillful actor who needs to be exercised in the science of anatomy which reconstructs Galen, until he knows the junctions of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their relation; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their movement.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hippocrates said that a name is motion, mostly in small work, and greatly in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already said that about him in the introduction of this book; because who does not know what we have said about anatomy, does not evacuate that he will not fall into error, for which many men die, thus you have seen many of them, because they are formed in this science and get away from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has incidentally induced an scrophilous aposteme on the neck of a woman, and incidentally cut some arteries of the neck so that great bleeding occurred until the woman almost died among his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who pretended to remove a stone from a man's bladder, which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone in a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called him a destroyer, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and because of the disposition of the patient's body, he was conscious under it that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he gave to a black craftsman whose duty was to break the fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he destroyed the fracture, above the wound, with poultices and stitches in a strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And I followed the dislocations according to their desires, and I followed the reliefs, and I followed the treatments for several days and commanded that they not dislocate the limb; and it was thus until the thigh and foot were affected by apostema, and he went to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have already called him a destroyer, and he was unable to dislocate the limb, and he achieved tranquility and thus relieved his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be refrained, and it did not cease to walk around the corruption in the limb until the patient suffered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous aposteme, and he ulcerated for several days, until the malignity of it was magnificent in his lord's sight.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cancerous humor is pure melancholy, then it does not cover that it will not come to him at all, but rather it is in the member which suffers from everything, as if it were held by all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this, sons, it is necessary that the operation with my own hand be divided into two devotions: one is an operation associated with health, and another is a work in which there is peril in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in every place of this book where I found opposition in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the foolish ones do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And then take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are fallen and are confirmed.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And you will follow the best way for the grace of God, leading to salvation and laudable success, and you will leave the terrible evils of difficult healing, and you will put away your arms from what makes you fear, so that you may have faith in your heart and in your name you may not be evasive: because more remains in your glory, and thus also in the world and afterwards among your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Because the disease has been located in certain moist places:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Not to medicate bad patients badly, so that bad doctors are not named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have devoted this book to three sections."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the primary partition."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the ferrumens of the cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"The division of the second partition."
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter, on suction and perforation, and on cupping glasses, and on poultices, and on extraction of arrows and on similarities to those, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"The division of the third partition."
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on treatment of twisting and on similarities to those; chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of the instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"On cauteries I make a focus and acute medicine and reminiscence of the operation."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"At this point begins the treatise of the entire book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"I will discuss the quality of the juices of that cautery and of its instruments, and in which complex situation it is prohibited to use cauteries."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juice of the cautery and of its instrument is a long and prolix sermon, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and to me it seems enough to take a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"Therefore I say that cauteries universally confer to all complex situations the quality of matter or its matter, except for two complex situations, which are complex situations devoid of matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"In the complex situation of dry and withered matter they disagree; for some said that cauteries are useful for that, and others said the contrary, that cauteries are not convenient in a bad illness which is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a bad illness, dry and withered, may be healed."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And they say that one who says the contrary of that, that by cauteries it is made useful in all bad dry and withered illnesses that are seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complex situation of fire, you find the body of man to be cold."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say by the sermon of that one, that I have already experimented and discovered many times at my own expense."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"Moreover, I do not know that it comes over that one who has already been experimented and experienced in the chapter of cauteries by last exercise, and to have known the diversity of the complex situation of men and the disposition of illnesses in their metesises, and the causes of those, and the accidents of those, and the space of time of those."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"Moreover, in the other complex situations, it is not about your fear, and mainly in the cold and humid illnesses, because all doctors have agreed on those, and do not disagree about the usefulness of cauteries in those."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cauteries is fire and its goodness, so concerning cauteries, it is a comburent medicine, because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and does not harm another member unless it is adjusted with a small benefit."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"Moreover, the action of comburent medicine reaches to that in the members which are near it, and strengthens them to come into the ailing member with difficult healing and strengthens them to listen."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"Moreover, fire, by its sublime quality and good substance, does not do anything but superfluously, and it is already known to us through experiment and long duration of service in the art about the truth of causes; and for that I have been excused from the length of the sermon, and if it were not that it is not read in my book in this passage to you secretly hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion by which it expels illnesses, a philosophical sermon demonstrative, which would be acquiesced in your pestilent pages."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to use cauteries and pause at the best time of spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cauteries are convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the usefulness of that which I have with cauteries, and mainly if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and steady, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared that those who bring evil may come, which is more than a small harm entering at that time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And thus I do not cater to your pestilent pages, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that illness which is healed by cauteries, it is not returned at all times, and they pause at that consequence."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not so because the doctors do not burn in that place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the humors which are the cause for why pains occur.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Maybe the emperor's cautery is excessive on the medicine to demonstrate his worth and virtue of his operation and greatness of his lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and his virtue, and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of excesses in him, and what has happened to him in his acquisition of vices and semblances of those causes; but that the illness on which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few excesses and humors, thus as cautery of tooth for pain and semblance to that, it is possible that in him there does not return that pain, rather what happens in a small way.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, for they believe that it is not a cure that profits from medicine or another cause that profits from cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not but when they administer the manifold ways of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause they administer thus cautery, and it profits from that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And henceforth I will say that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as if it were not absolutely virtuous, because you have already tried it and experienced that it does not do so except in certain bodies, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, thus as they said; but when you perform cautery with a focus of gold, it is not for you to declare, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepares to receive fire; and if you adjust it over the ignition, the gold melts from the focus, and sometimes in the focus certain layers are formed so that the artisan can occupy himself with that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, it is done to burn with iron instead of gold, we put it more lightly and more proximally to the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have now ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that I may give to the demanding one what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On the cautery of headache due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the servile accident of which there are two causes, so it is cause of swelling and multitude of flux rheumatic, called corrissa, from the head to the parts of the veins and arteries flowing, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and of gout, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and semblance in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate with medicine laxative the whole head, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and his age and his custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then it commands him to shave his head with a razor, and then to sit between his thighs on a curved bench and to place his hands on his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then he places the razor of his palm then he puts it on the razor of the nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Maybe emperor, as the finger said of my own place is happened, it signifies that place with a probe, and then ignites the olive wood cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then he places it on the sensitive place with a probe, in a way that descends, at which the finger of the hand is constricted little by little, and you turn it around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then he lifts his hand lightly and regards the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then he lifts his hand, and if it does not turn his hand to that iron, another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by the bone what I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then he places it on the burned area in a bandage and leaves it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then he cures the place with four-drug ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And I said that when the Roman plague spreads, it is better to take the arm, because it is more helpful and brings greater joy.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	I instructed that some of those who need to be cauterized on the back of the bone, and hold the cautery inside until it reaches a certain part of the vertebrae.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then return to the water that is adjusted to the bone, and then be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	I instructed others that I would apply the cautery to the back, until it penetrates into the bone with strong impression until the bone breaks, and this is the method of healing small fractures.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And I estimate that from that place, the vapors of the head are expelled.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And it has been held by the spreading plague for a long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two species of cauteries at all, except in some homes according to the way of fear; and therefore, you must, better is my health, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity of the aforementioned thus we have testified in the other members, and especially since the head of the patient is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cauteries is most safe and better for me; and from that house and I do that work, I am healthy.
Capitol segon.	It follows accordingly.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the entire head is afflicted with chronic and long pain and it is in prolonged illness, and uses remedies of poultices and bandages and head-wraps and plasters and ointments and catheters and girdles, and especially if already cauterized by a cautery that I recount and does not apply to any of those causes, then consider that the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not fragile and atrophied with great fear, then that cauterying is another cautery beneath that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauteries are applied above the horn of the dry head with cauteries until the bone is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and discover the quantity of the os that we have recounted and cauteries, and apply it to a cautery in the back part of the head at the place called "vas" - and it is that place where the wind is paused.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in that way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient feels great diverse pain from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I said that this cautery is in its place, because it is clear that the cautery is the one that cauteries the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the method of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-ancient migration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain dwells in the head's partition, or it is extended to the vein, then evacuate with mondifying medicines, and administer another cure, which I have dictated in the devotions of illnesses; and all does not apply, then cautery is in two ways: either cautery with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Better cautery with burning medicine is that you take a handful of alum, and scrape it off and bind the extremities of it to both ends of the heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it is in the soft place beneath the bone, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen it above the place where it is stopped by constant constriction, and let it be there for three hours; and then remove it and pull out the alum, and let the plague pass for two or three days, and then pause on the submerged coto in a bandage until the place forms a crust.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, I will give you some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Better cautery with iron is according to this manner: ignite for cautery of which this is the method.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus formed like a claw in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is beneath is not injured — and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is injured by the vertebrae of the bone thus as the magnitude of it, and elevate your hand so that the artery which is beneath is not injured, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then imbibe the coto in salt water and pause it on the place, and let it be there for three days; and then pause the coto wrapped in a bandage, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see that the cautery is applied to the extremity of the gut according to the cautery, and beware of not making an incision in the artery in this non-ancient migration.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cautery of ancient migrations.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat a migration, as we have said about the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of the illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes because of the illness that does not respond to what we have said about the first cautery in medicine or the cautery in focus, then it is necessary that you ignore the intestinal cautery until it is whitened, since it indicates above the line of longitude where the greatest pain is, or which one; and hold your hand for a while and strengthen it before incising the artery and penetrating to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by lack of chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves are not damaged by that, and that there is no spasmodic convulsion.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is obstructed, because in the obstruction of it there is fear, and greater harm to he who ignores what is done and is not studied and experienced; and thus the operation begins in it at the commencement.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find a reminder of the rule for the flow of blood in the artery according to the usual method, in the same place of this free book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and you see the body of the patient is tolerable, cautery it in the middle place of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of straightening of arteries by cautery having two edges, and it is a better cautery this way and more convenient.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is treated with causal remedies and another treatment which was said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then apply the cautery, and this is the one that has been named pointed, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And apply the pointed cautery to the ignition, and it should be directed towards the environment of the whole ear as if it were rotating, or in the circle of any of these steps if the pain is in any of them.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Gradually apply the cautery to the root of the ear little by little, because you should feel the place in tension.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you apply the cautery to several points throughout the entire ear, and thus it is, and then cure the places until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of turbidity.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turbidity which is treated and with cautery is not only of the species that come from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	It is necessary to cautery the species that comes from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of turbidity with herbs and capyphrenia and gargling, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary that you cautery the illness with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And hold your hand with the cautery for the opposite part of the affected illness, because mollification is not seen except in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cautery is that you cautery it with the cautery in the right extremity of the ear, then rising a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the longitude of the pain, and hold your hand on the cautery until the quantity of the greatest pain of the specific code is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the gut, the form of which is described in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	It is more necessary to subtly apply it, because one little bit thus goes far; and it is necessary to cut in it with excessive fat a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place where it is described as a process until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not succeed and the illness has no fever, then cautery it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said below.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And you have been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; it is more serious; and then you should be cured in a way that proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	About the cauterization of oblivion made through a weak flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It happens that those given to the patient at the beginning of the illness are large and powerful remedies that significantly influence the servant's mind.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then you remove the whole head of the patient and place it on the cushion of their employer, as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place those cooled branding irons, because that is the manner of cauterizing.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it in this way, according to the method which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore, if the wounds are healthy; and if not, then make three cauterizations on the back part of their head, which descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then cure the cautery in a way that proceeds.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you find the patient is more tolerant, then make the cautery in a middle place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize above both horns (of the head).
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then cure it until it is healthy; and let the olive oil cautery be according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	About the cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It happens that you proceed in mondification of the head with jars and with what we have said; and then remove the patient's head, and then cauterize it with cauteries on the middle place of the head, and with cauteries above all the horns of the head, and with cauteries on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to treat those who are tolerant patients and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and subsequently cauterize until it is combusted from the codeina almost to death, and lift the dead flesh.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure it until it is healthy, and this olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	About the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not that the epileptic is cauterized, but rather that the epilepsy is due to a weak flame.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore it happens that you mondify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and another cure which we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer from medicines, then administer gargles and masticatories to the servant mondifying, beforehand with what is done for many days, in a blessing of the vines.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then remove the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the preceding manner, and another cautery on its occiput, and above each horn of the head it is cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the olive oil cautery be according to what has been preceded.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then place subtle cauteries according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	About the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and weak flame, then cauterize it with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him something that mondifies his brain according to what has been preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then remove the patient's head, and then make a gentle tortoise-shaped cautery of them above the circle, and then place it in the middle place of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated comfortably, and hold him firmly from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then place a liniment; and it is more worthy of being anointed with old olive oil.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire for a tempered heat by measure, which the patient suffers when it is in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply that to the middle place of his head in the circle, and leave it until it is refreshed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient for a whole week, another regimen of his good until he is healthy; or if you want, cauterize it making small points according to the manner of him, but holding the hand with one cautery thus ordered: this is a special kind of cautery that humects the brain in equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then stop that constricted area in the belly or in the groin.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	About the cauterization of descending water in the wheel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the commencement of water in the wheel through the signs which you had said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient who monifies the head of it, and guard against all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sweating in bath water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the commencement of water in two wheels, or one side if it is the commencement of water in one wheel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	You should cauterize all the veins and arteries which are in the codeina; and place the cauteries in that long area at the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, apply some medicine to him, which is possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and their excision, and caution against fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries, producing a derivative effect.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	About the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the wheels are old and assuaged by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head beforehand, and it is verified that this is a superfluous flow of fluid matter, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the commencement of water in the wheels, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you indicate the addition, then cauterize that on the entire side of the wheel above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	About the cauterization of fetid nasal discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate that with water which we have said in the division and do not hasten your medication, then prepare and give to drink to the patient three nights; and rub his head, and cauterize that with a cautery mixed with olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a clave-shaped cautery on both eyebrows below the hair, a small one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery that you do not cut into that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the clave-shaped cautery is in this form.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	About the cauterization of relaxation of eyelids of the wheels.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the wheel is relaxed due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so, cauterize that above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries on the entire partition, and thus lengthen the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much with your hand on the cautery, rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	About the cauterization of the eyelid of the wheel when the skin is converted into internal partitions and punctures the wheel.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the wheel is converted into internal partitions and punctures the wheel, cauterize in those ways according to two manners, whether it is with iron or with combustible medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize him with fire, command the patient to take that water which boils the skin thus as those which are mundane, until they are prolonged and fattened; and if you puncture that which is necessary for its nourishment, then strengthen the wheels of it with a band so that it is not diminished until the skin is born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are born and fattened, then pause the head of the patient in the tieu seat, and place a sign above the eyelid of the wheels of it with a tent, with a signal which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the signal proper of the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then stop that constricted area in a white wheel or in a soft padding on the wheel.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize above the figure which has been signaled, little by little, in gentle touches, until the surface of the codeina is burned, which is thus like a leaf of myrtle, entirely and properly apparent.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the signal of sanity of the entire work is that you see the eyelid of the wheel already constricted and the skin of it elevated from the puncture of the wheel.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place a pause on the affected area to reduce the inflammation.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the skin returns to its natural state for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery on that entire area as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and is equalized so that the skin does not puncture the vein.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift their skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a paper template in the shape of a mitre.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a soothing ointment with living snake oil and an onion. I think there might be some mistake in the original text, as "conogut" doesn't seem to make sense in this context. I'm guessing it might be "cologut", which could mean "colostrum" or "galenget", referring to a type of ointment or unguent. Where it is, and then mix those causes well, and make that a fermentation for so long that it is not frozen; and then spread it on the paper which was made thus in the shape of a mitre, and place that on one vein of both arms; and place below the vein enclosed in an album of skin, and the head of the patient be in the correct position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little so that the patient does not feel the bitterness of the medicine, because the bitterness is in it as if from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then as you will perceive that the bitterness is passing, then leave the medicine and handle it with your fingers; then as the bitterness ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the vein with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted thus as if washed from the constriction of fire or incision, because then it is; and if it does not turn back to that place where the medicine was not applied and does not deny until the operation is equalized and the vein is constricted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place on the affected area to reduce the coding of the adjustment, and then treat that with a definite ointment or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, from your operation to keep diligent vigilance so that the medicine does not fall on the vein, and if the eyelid after several days is softened and some cause of the skin punctures the vein, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly thus as you did at the beginning, and then send it to be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of the mitre.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the veins of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to what is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it will not be forgotten the way of rectifying to that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of fistula that is in the tear duct of the vein.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of the diseases and do not contradict your cure, then it is necessary to cauterize that in this manner: command the patient to place their head in the correct position, and hold the head of some minister between the thighs, but in such a way that it is not forgotten nor agitated in the correct head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place the cautery point in an album of skin or in a poultice of ptilli over the vein of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be conical, thus as it is the shape of a reed or a point of a voltor, from one extremity to which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out thus as an probe.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But I think that which is cooked is better in the good work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then take the fistula if it is open, and draw out its moisture and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on the vein the cautery which is well ignited, and hold it with your hand a little away from the cautery of the vein at the bridge of the nose, so that you do not err with your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the vein and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then at the beginning of the vein cautery, perceive into the bone, it is; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then place on the affected area to reduce and wrap it in a dried ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been passing eleven days and there is no health, then stop using the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is written in the seventh chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula, which the first wise men discovered: then at the place of the fistula and fix it in that fissure as subtly as possible, according to its shape; Then put in it a quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and you will have your hand in a good retention, and do not let the patient move so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the hollow of that; and cover with a cloth soaked in wine or water, because the melted lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it marvelously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterizing and curing, well; and if not, then it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the nose according to how it will come back to its own location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the hernia of the thighs.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Softened moles that make ulcers on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those ulcers with what we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your care, then apply the small cutting cautery according to this form that is described:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And it is the conquest of it (the ulcer) according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place it (the cautery) carefully in those ulcers until the cautery penetrates to the root of the ulcers.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with wax until it is healthy.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess is formed and then breaks, and it is ruptured, and it is ancient, and correct breaks and it makes a fistula, and then you treat that and do not deepen your care, then stop so that you apply cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that ignition in the hole of the fistula, and you have your hand inside until the iron reaches the root of it, and afterwards make a scab or two; and then treat it with what we have said about curing until it is healthy.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the wound is abscessed and is healthy, well; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to how it will come back to its own chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loosened, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide, then place the head of the patient in the same position, and apply the cautery in the form that will come out thus, likewise that you place the gum over the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery firmly, and hold your hand inside until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards stop that, because the loosened tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is toned up and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness, or if there is cold or worm in it, or does not confide in the cure with medicine, then cauterize it according to two methods: either cauterize with a cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in a copper vessel, and then take it out and wrap it over the extremity of the tongs, and then merge it into the boiling horn, and place it over the painful tooth firmly until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge the needle or tube in the cow's horn mentioned above, and place it over the painful tooth, and place over that ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the root of the conquest of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the emperor forbids cauterization with fire unless you attend to the quantity of iron or copper, and it is in the heart of some gross thing and the acuteness of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then apply the cautery in the form that will come, and place it over the tooth and hold your hand inside until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times because the pain will be removed or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And you should cover the area where that cautery is applied to the patient's good mouth and hold it for an hour, then scrape off the residue; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	You should cauterize where you see extreme excess according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When ulcers are caused by flecma and cold humors and do not respond to digestion through medications and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is this, having two extinguished extremities so that they do not reach the smoke of the cautery to the other extremity, and pause that ignition over that aposteme for a while, and another if it is necessary for that, until it pervades to the root of the aposteme.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and place it aside for three days and pause on the affected area until it is fully restored, so that what the fire has consumed is repaired.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that wounded area with tents and dressings until it is healthy.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or of the two cauteries is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of wounds of the feet and constrictions of the legs.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is due to coldness of complexion, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medications, and then cauterize that which is the root of the goitre in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not penetrate with the cautery to the goitre nor burn the cartilage of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery on the joint of the neck in the posterior spine of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be shaped according to the preceding method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that which is previously mentioned until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of diseases of the lung and of coughs.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughs and diseases of the lung are caused by cold moisture and the patient does not have fever nor thirst and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the forked part in the affected areas of the loins and hips; and with another cautery in the middle area of the chest between two nipples; and shape the cautery according to the preceding form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cauteries that are called points, the form of which is previously mentioned in the treatment of pain of the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let them be points until they reach those; and then heal that which is previously mentioned until it is healthy.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery has three ramps because the cauterization is in that: one time you can do three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of the titillations that are on the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not stop in the hour of its return, until it is at its usual custom of returning, and then by a small movement it is dislocated thus that it is ended, as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be turned over onto their back or side; and then lift the cartilage which is in the upper part of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated above.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cartilage until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and thus those subtleties according to the quantity of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause on the cauteries because they are hot, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a shaped cautery or three pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When coldness comes into the stomach and much moisture enters to extract its completeness and it multiplies there, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confuse them, then it is necessary for the patient to be on their back with raised hands, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger in a shaped cautery, and two cauteries below the sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangular cautery appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so they do not make a mess.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equivalent to the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the knee.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be added in this form, And if you want, make a great cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let it be a circular cautery according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cautered in points to that which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want to hold, and then cautery that with a cautery at the points; and then cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cautery of the ulcerated foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When an ulcer on the foot causes pain due to cold or humidity or excessive flatulence until the normal complexion is altered by superfluous egress, and it is cured with the remedy that we have said and not comforted, then it is necessary that the ulcer be elevated above its cervix, and you feel with three cauteries according to this form and this measured quantity on the foot below the hips, where one perceives the decubitus of the man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be that which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery motion.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equivalent to the quantity of the marrow of the vertebrae of the knee, and it does not need further adjustment; and if the ulcer stands above his feet; and if it does not exist, then it will be seated, which has already extended its thighs, and lifted its legs.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cautery these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed excessively in the cautery, and let the vertebrae of the entire spine be absorbed so that the entire body is affected and reaches into the intestines, for the spine here is subtle; and you will know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an ulcer or abscess occurs on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its sheath, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the ulcer will be more grave and painful.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the sheath of the foot, the pain is greatly acute and sometimes the doctors are fatigued by the cure of it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then it is necessary that the ulcer be turned above its cervix; and then feel the place of the abscess with your hand; and then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a razor, the shape of which has been described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cautery it with that cautery until the entire spine is burnt, until it reaches the sapho, until it seems to be healthy.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it by curing other abscesses until it is healthy.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the hands of which many maladies are recognized; rather, some experiments have been attempted, but I, the Emperor, abandon this, and it is better for us.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cautery of wounds.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology for wounds are made according to this manner of being a doer, and it is this that you take from the roots of Aristology a long dry root that is found, and let it be of the thickness of the finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and expose it to the fire, and then cautery with a cautery at that place where it is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and there are two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the cisterna, declining slightly towards the back parts; and there is another cautery in the middle place of the foot; and another above the stomach, and three cauteries of the back parts; and there is a cautery at that place where it is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary that you comprehend your hand with the cautery, unless it is in the manifestation of the spine in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And thus I have described the ancient methods that are ancient among men who use iron-like cauteries that resemble a razor and ignite it, and place it in that place where it is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and health is restored, just as we have said in the case of the foot ulcer.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation, cautery is not to be feared, because the humor that has accumulated in the fistula does not bring healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the mole.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the mole's malady as we have spoken of in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cautery is done in three ways, all of which are direct, one of which is to make three or four linear incisions according to the length of the mole, following the figure of the cauteries of the finger, the shape of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And it is between each cautery the width of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the manner which we have mentioned in the cauteries of the finger, including the width.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand on the cautery; and the mole's evil is above the two soles.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cauteries having two vertiments, which causes we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and it sets the code which is at the end of the mole where it perceives the evil of the sinister mole.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And it is your elevation where you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that you make several cauteries according to the latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two vertiments, ignite motion, in that entrance where they penetrate the code of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus you make four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vertiments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery, so that it is not necessary to make a break for three days, because it is more comfortable than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter xxixi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of hydropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not made in hydropsy except on the affected limb itself.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat hydropsy, the methods of treatment are those which we have mentioned in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the finger, and one on the mole, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportionate to the specificity of the code.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it takes a long time to heal.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the evil of treatment with the cautery, because it is necessary that it be added to the two intentions, and it will be fixed on the healthy aid.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery is what is cauterized on the belly is club-shaped according to what its shape was previously, and it is what is cauterized on the back is olive-shaped according to what precedes its shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostematized in hydrops and are full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot at night, where it is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand over the cautery and do not touch it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return to it at all, because the stagnant water resolves.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery is made at the extremity of the cautery, cutting edge.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery is according to the length of the thigh: one at the knee and another at the middle location of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And then leave the open wound to heal for a long time, so that no stagnant water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure the limbs with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of the belly and abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly and abdomen are cold and humid inside, so that they debilitate the vertebrae, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with those methods of treatment and do not confuse, and sometimes the evil suffering requires a cautery of virtue exhibiting, then cauterize with a great cautery on the navel according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle, and four cauteries around the subtle navel, with a subtle club-shaped cautery; and a cautery on the alcantin above the large kidney, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humidities exhibit and the evil is tolerable, then cauterize on the peritoneum and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal area, because it is a perfect cure of youth, from which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that corrupts or humidities that have corrupted, and are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confer quick cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus below the small triangular spine, and with a cautery beneath the umbilical region for two digits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that their stomach is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face is often pale, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with a cautery on their arm, and another cautery on their lower back with a clavicular cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time open, and then cure them from the inside so that they may be healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of anthrax, suitable for their abscesses.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you abscess anthrax, then ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into that abscessed anthrax, and hold it there for a short time until you reach the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make a vein or two, because if the abscesses are too strong, then cauterize some of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with what conferes to their healing so that they may be healthy.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more suitable for youthful treatment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of the divided parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when you see a fistula in the nature of the body, and it is old, corroding the healthy part of the body and humidities that have corrupted, and therefore it is more worthy to cover it with a subtle tenderness, and then constrict the quantity of the profundity of the body before the aforementioned tenderness.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cauteries that are similar in a row.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you pierce the tenderness.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that cautery until those corrupted bodies are completely burned, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place until it is healthy.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and you have abscessed from it the materials, and it remains like that for a long time, then know that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the prison of the corrupted bone, or it falls into those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of wounds.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the wounds there is pain from cold or from gross ventilation, and thus the quiet of the patient is disturbed, then cover those wounds with a cautery on each wound with a clavicular cautery, which brings about remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strengthen the cauterization on the second small day, so that three linear cauteries will come, and then they will be more suitable for youthful treatment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debility and mollification in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize above the pubic area on the right side of the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side of the body.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the nodes of the skin; and cauterize above with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a clavicular cautery according to what has been described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the matrix (or uterus).
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come to the matrix (or uterus), and thus it is prohibited from conception, and its menses are corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and there is pain in the having of them, then cover the place that needs to be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the umbilical area, as we have said about the bladder; and with a cautery above the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let it be a clavicular cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of a dislocated ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates and is fixed in the joint of the ankle, and it causes the inflammation of the surrounding area, and it seems that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is palpated in the boy's hips.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the patient on the joint of their ankle with a circular cautery, because you will have sensed it in the circuit of the joint like that which is revolved, and thus the joint will fall into its proper place within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And this is the cautery of which I previously described the method in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that man with three olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and then take care that it is fully healed within.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain goes to the joint of the ankle, and its cause is from cold and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said and not contradicted, and that is antiquated, then it is necessary to free the patient from gross humors with foul-smelling pills or artificial pills; and then you should cauterize him.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that it cauteries him on the joint of his ankle with three triangular-shaped cauteries, according to this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And it is the space which is between each cautery, the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes it is necessary to place the cautery on the middle spot on the top of the ankle, because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which the form is precised in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, there where the circle is contained and burns the inspection of the entire code.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in cases when pain is adherent to the ankle and does not extend within to the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	Sometimes if it is extended within to the thigh, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the thigh at the spot where the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers' width above the affected part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutting, and it is the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient feels that the pain is extended within to the spot close to the toes, then cauterize him here where it hurts with a cautery for three points or four or maybe even more if it is indicated for him.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize him here with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not ultimately use the cautery so much that it burns nerves or great articular surfaces, and that for this reason you are above the patient's evil nuisance or contradiction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterialized on the hip and ultimately in the cauterization, and the burnt focus inflated within so that the tumor reached the foot, and the burnt and corrupted entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then there is a strong accusation of a ventral solution, and then this leads to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of ankle, cautering with this manner: make a circle of iron like a ring, whose circumference is the width of a palm; and it should be seven or eight inches according to the thickness of a finger's bone or less by a little.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And divide that circle into another third; and it should be the space which is between them, the quantity of the notch of the foot; and these circles are used for two parts; and it should be the length of those keys, one notch or two notches, and make a decently apparelled iron margin in those circles; and this is their form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be ignited in the fire until it is red-hot and sparks are emitted, and then it should be placed on the joint of the ankle, the patient collected on the side of the bed.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize him with three red-hot cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave him like that for three days; then apply a dressing to him with a bandage and leave the ulcerated plague for many days; and then take care of him until he is fully healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Here is the translation:
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Maybe the best of the cauters is one who suffers them, and it is necessary to approach the area of his suffering.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Maybe the best cauter is a medicine that adheres, which you make two circles with an armula perforated in the gate of iron; it is the length of the partition in the narrowness of their shoes or those nails.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between almost the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and there are holes above and below, and it is that they contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then stop on the partition of the water where the patient lies on his side, and comprehend your hand on the partition of the water; and then take hot water and put it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the mordication and the adjustment of him — because that stops the mordication thus as with fire — until the mordication ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand from the instrument and remove the hot water from all of the water to lukewarm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it be for three days and stop on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remedy remains, and let it be for some days, and correct his poultice; this is the last stage of the treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure him with an ointment until he is healthy.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make him stand in it so that it contains water according to what is done in the water immersion.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkaline and not extinguished from two ingredients, a part one, and grind them and stop in a new vessel of which the part below is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the container.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And stop below the bottom of another vessel, and pour over that alkaline and not extinguished by lukewarm water which holds those for a finger, and since you comprehend them with your own hand for good compression, and let it descend from the sharp water in the part below to the other vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another not extinguished cause and other alkaline renovating, because at that time it will be of much stronger acuity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because that operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus of the medicines some are those that are cauterized frequently, thus as they are detoxified and sweetened and made savory in such a way that they are mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure in which he was cured of pain of water and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be free of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healthy for a while thus as recommended, because it strengthens his leg in bath and exercise, and he will not have that again.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that he takes certain green cetraragi, and if it is not found green, take fresh fig; and much is ground into a few gray ones and stopped on the water in which there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it is tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in bath and then when his body is relaxed, put him in the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healthy.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it's not necessary to use cautery in these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Maybe Escorides says that when the vein of the goat's head is cauterized, it will be beneficial for him; and this is the cautery on him according to this method: take wool and dip it in hot oil, and stop it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's head and inflame that in fire until it is made into charcoal; and then stop it on the wool and let it be stretched out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then iterate that, and do not stop until the sensation of the mordication disappears into the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cautery of goat's horns.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain of Toes.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in the toes are due to many causes, such as through bruising or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, through infusion of cold and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterizing does not cut except in this one species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, evacuate the patient's body with prepared pills and make them similar to theirs, which are made on the back of the hand in the line where the pain is three lines according to its latitude, because you have tentacles in each line or cauteries or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient's body and its strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it is made a point-cautery with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four at the middle clavicle point, according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	About cauterization at the beginning of gout treatment.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Soft words are whispered to this patient as small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they stumble upon their structure in the wings and elevate their movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And vertebrae in the back of the spine of the hand and of its joints that have already started to overgrow above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that point with a cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine in a circle.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize on the circuit of the spine with a pointed cautery two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And they are the proper points placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the area inward so that it is healthy with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	About cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then how gout caused by cold is cured in a manner of cure and the pains are not left behind, then they remain to be cauterized.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize with evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains go inward to the teeth or to other joints, and there are many words that are whispered, then cauterize that point with three cauteries or four of the entire part with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed for this cautery, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, it is only a little around the specific area of the code.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains go inward to the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called sciatica, then point on the circuit of the veins thus as they revolve, point on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point on the circuit of the veins above each joint and above the finger of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains reach the surrounding joints or muscles, then cauterize the corresponding areas of the entire part of the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is made with good regimen and the flux is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	About cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the limbs and the intestine comes out of its cavity to the genital area, and this is the beginning of an abscess, then it is necessary that you order the patient to stay seven days without eating and to use lenient causes so that the fissure of the seventh ventre is healed.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands over the seventh back, and command him to hold the seventh wing inward so that it is not visible or appears with the intestine or hernia.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the ties of the fingers and sew them with thread to hold the rupture over the bone of the pentagonal hand, signaling the extremity of which is similar to the circle of the subordinate parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	so that it is very red and has many sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then stop the cautery on that sign at your hand, and you will have the consolation of having cured the bone of the toe within the finger of the ring; and it is clear that if you have not achieved this in the first instance, you will achieve it in another attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the movement of the intestine during your cautery, lest you burn that intestine so that above the patient's thighs no death or other great evil occurs.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you apply the cautery, do not touch the bone, lest it does not confer your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be careful that the cautery of children is subtle according to their age and the measure of theirs.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then take care to treat the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage, until the scar is removed from the focus.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care to heal those other ulcers until they are healthy.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on their back for 40 days until the area and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And be careful to pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of his cure, which empties his belly, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is time to get up after 40 days, administer the food decently and gradually, and hold him back for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him be moderate in labor and in replenishment of food and drink, and in violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of health, he will be entirely healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you will direct the cure of the ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and I want that you do not trust, then cauterize the rupture of that one with a red-hot cautery according to the quantity of it, and let it be that which is exhorted from the codena, thus as the third part of it; and then take care of that one which we have said, and it will be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And you will direct the first ones that the rupture is cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked on the tents:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a paused line that goes for the latitude in the lattice above the rupture, and another line below; and pause your hand with a keyed cautery, but the first cautery is more gentle and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On Cauterization of the Torso.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain is felt in some members by chance or by percussion and it persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then be careful to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be of the entire member according to its magnitude and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location of the torso and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if it is healthy through the first cautery, well; and if not, then apply the cautery again to him; because it is customary for those pains that they are punctured in a member adjacent to another member, so that you know that you have achieved with the cautery until the patient is healthy.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The leprous wounds are sometimes treated with a cautery for great youthful improvement, and it is better if the species of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And thus when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is contagious and as that one is cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, neither this, and fear about the patient that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of its complexity, then cauterize that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it, and at the forehead to the end of the hairs; and two above the horns; and one behind, above the nape or service.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand with the cautery a little inside so that you impress a small impression on the bone, and from it the scabs are dislocated, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and cauterize above the melsa according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then be careful to cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery above the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries above the two mussels, and two cauteries above the two spondils of the neck, and six cauteries above the spondils of the back, and one great one above the spondils near the hip, and one on the hip, and two above the loins, and one above each loin, and two above the ankles, and one above each ankle, and two above the knees, and two above the muscles, and two on the tendons of the seven feet; and cauterize that above all the joints of the said members and feet, and above each talon of the seven feet, and above the foscils of their own members.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves that are above the ankle, lest they become inflamed.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some burned areas are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the thigh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the veins.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more you will benefit and confer; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just as they have said, so that the body of the patient is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints, as is preceded by the species of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the cautery with a mixture of oil and honey, and another remedy enters so that it is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And it is good to introduce the cautery into the inspection of the codena (knee) a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that one with an ointment until it is healthy.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some burned areas are cauterized for some stupor that reaches the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back and gives ease to the nerves which govern that member, and the stupor is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	You should not presume more about that, except what is known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the Cauterization of Ulcers that are Morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not respond to the treatment of medicinal ointments, then you cauterize above that with a pointed cautery, a little according to the quantity of the specificity of the knee, until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that one with a mixture of oil and lentils, and rose oil, and leaves of dragon plant, and blood of dove or blood of pigeon, from each one a part and all are mixed, and then anoint a cloth and place it on the area until it is healthy.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the Cauterization of Cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to burn that tumor, then cauterize that with a ring-shaped cautery around its circuit, just as it is revolving.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And I assure you that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; more, I have not seen this, because I think it will be ulcerated, and already I have seen some burned areas.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterize in the circuit of it with a ring-shaped cautery, just as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the Cauterization of Indurations.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some indurations are delayed in maturation, and thus it is because of the superfluity that makes them, or because of the state of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten their maturation; then cauterize in the circuit of it with many small pointed cauteries; and then leave it alone, for it will hasten its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	Moreover, if you want to make a perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and pause that in the middle place of the induration until it penetrates the knee.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you make a cautery in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal that until it is healthy.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the Cauterization of Corrosions.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a corrupting ambulation in the member, which corrodes that one just as a fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you want to burn that corrosion in the place where it suffers from cauteries, then ignite clave-shaped cauteries, many small ones, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that entirely, until you eradicate all the corrosion and none of its causes remain.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it alone for three days, and apply on the cauterized places a mixture of oil and triple-distilled oil until all scars are entirely eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then heal that one with flesh-producing ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Moreover, after three days, the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated with some old medicines with acute medicine, because that is half in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	Sometimes a emperor's cautery is applied to the pus to purify the juvenile humor.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already said that the cure of this with medicine is acute in division, and therefore take that which is most efficacious for each of its parts.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cautery of wounds and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Motions are made in the affected parts of the foot afflicted with a wound, which is called a gross, inward, and painful wound; and cautery is applied in two ways, namely burning with fire and burning with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Sometimes cautery with fire is that which ignites the cautery like a penalty of torture, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that it contains the entire affected part, and should have subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then pause the ignition on the wound, and then turn your hand around the cautery in a circular motion over the wound until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wound.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it be for three days until it begins to form crust.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with marshmallow root and salted water, and let the plaster stay on it for a night, so that it will be eradicated of its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place affected by generating flesh until it is healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and motions are made on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then it is fitting that you administer to them cautery with hot water, and it is that you take a cannula of iron or fire or penalty of torture, and pause it over the wound; and then pour a small quantity of hot water, and remove your hand, and you turn it around in compression of your entire hand, and it should be inserted into the margin of the cannula into the root of the wound, and inject hot water through the tube to the root of the wound; and wait for the patient a little while the biting of the hot water lasts for an hour, and then remove it, because the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do it in those places and then proceed to the other until you have treated all the parts of their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those wounds whose roots are eradicated, and the flesh will regenerate from the engendered juices.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cautery of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or due to fever from a cold cause, or for another similar cause, then it is fitting that you apply cautery with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between which each vertebra has a cautery; and apply cautery on the soles of the feet, and on the stomach, apply olive oil cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of it is restored and strengthened by the health of the affected cold place.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery of sudden accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is suddenly afflicted, and it has pustules that are made of gross corrupt materials; therefore it is fitting to begin with appearances, so that it should be cauterized over every head of the fistula with subtle cauteries of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended by fire; or with roots of long-standing erosion; or with slow-acting cauteries.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes motions are made to cauterize at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and they are not believed, and it is dislodged from the superfluous excess that makes them, and it is healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Sometimes an emperor's cautery is applied to evacuate through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cautery of fluxes of blood accidentally spilled through incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many motions are made to fluxes of arteries that are injured by the wound which they have before, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and it seems difficult to remove them.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then when it happens to that, then you should take it with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and pause over that until the tie is tightened and those motions are stopped until the flux of blood from beneath the tie is stanched, and does not flow out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then pause at the fire with olive oil cauteries few and large in number, for many motions, and blow over them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them a small or large one according to the place and wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly holding above where the tie has been made, and you will hold the cautery until it is bound and restrained, and the blood is stopped.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the tie and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully prepared from the cauteries which are in the fire, and thus do not cease to do it until the blood is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not confuse the nerves here, and that another evil comes over the patient besides this one.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	You know that when the arterial flow is healthy, then it is not possible to restrict the blood in those areas, and especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four methods: either with a cautery as I have said, or with an extraction when it has not been extracted, because when the extremities of my veins are confused they are restricted and the blood is restored; or that it be tied with a strong ligature, or placed on medicinally constricted areas whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they are strengthened by pulsing in a constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Perhaps he who administers decent restriction of the ligature and structure drops or places causes that burn and resemble, does not comfort but rather tart.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Perhaps if he endeavored to reach an alcove and there is no doctor present or medicine, then make a pause on the aforementioned indication over the orifice of that vein as I have said, and understand the great constriction within which the blood is stagnant due to the dominant part of the plague, and above the artery it does not seem removed; and above the artery is aspurgated with water of great coldness within which the blood is congealed and thickened; and perhaps you should think about having to cauterize or needing medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and ventoses and of phlebotomy and of plagues and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have said in the first chapter all about the disease in which cautery is convenient and comburent medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauteries; and I will order the chapters according to the subordination of the head into the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter for that method, so that it may be of use to the one who seeks it, then above that which he will have demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And therefore I begin here, certainly, sons, that you learn that in this chapter it is to terrify what is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that which you think is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuated catheters are involved, which is with blood in which life is given through the aspiration of the vein or incision over the aposteme or perception of exstiration or purification of the plague or extraction of sageta or incision of peyra and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those accompany fear and trembling, and in the end of their catheters death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is in the seat, because some evacuated cases are of those who have manners of men with many manners of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is certain that they are carried away by their disease and it is far from them to death, and thus for the vehemence of what he finds in his disease, and for the length of his disease, and in the disease it is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those it is what gives to your son to have and to say, you hoping for that health, and the following disease is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you do not think that you consent to that which comes to you from this manner; and your caution should be greater than what is said, and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause over what is not certain science which verifies what comes to you, and in which you perceive laudable success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And you will be established in the cure of all your diseases with prognosis and indication of that which is converted health, because in that it is to you helpers above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspire you with good understanding and may not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this distinct chapter according to the chapters that precede in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that it may be of use to you what you demand of it and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this disease many evacuated places reaches the infants from infancy and when the nourishment strengthens the head of the infant its livelihood.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some evacuated places reach through a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	Perhaps you have not seen this disease except in infants; and all those whom you see are caught by death, and thus it is to me a hidden work in those.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that an infant whose head was full of water, and the head of him was always thus magnified until it ceased not being able to be measured by the greatness of his head, and perhaps the humidity made it increase until he died from suffocation.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or moisture is added between the vertebrae and the bone, or it is added beneath the bone over the ribcage.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation is such that the moisture is between the vertebrae and the bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a hole in the middle of the head in a latitude, and let the length of the hole be two inches so that the moisture can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And then if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two holes here, according to this manner.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, it seems that you have opened the entire skull and the water is pouring out when you compress it with your hand in that place, and it is not possible to hold it back in the partitioned areas.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary to make three holes in the middle of the head, according to this manner.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then the incision is made to extract all the moisture; and then the holes are strengthened with bandages and plugs; and then apply oil on top for six days, and then remove the ligament and cure the wound with tents and unguents, and strengthen the head in equality; and nourish the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another manner of incision, which considers how to appear the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated places are more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the flow of water is finished, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid those flowing veins of blood and harm the patient by that flow of blood in evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries which are near the aurelles, called Hilassysses.
Capitol segon.	Chapter third.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are formed some catarrh or rheum in the veins or at the feet, and it is antiquated, and it does not confer on that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision in those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then it is necessary when you want to incise those that the patient's reason loses his head, and then make a hole in the place with a sharp instrument so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with a bandage; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the places of whoever is above the places which are near the aurelles, and they hide themselves until some homes.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then make a sign on the artery with a tent, and then incise whoever is in the spatula of whoever is in the partition above in the pervening incision into the bone, and it is for the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula beneath the artery and turn it to direct the incision to the upper parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision is two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is ejected with a pulsating egress, which is felt before it becomes frequent.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary to measure from the aurelle the quantity of space of three digits, and then make a sign with a tent, and finish into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which is necessary to stop the flow of blood is a quantity of six ounces. and for it is not possible to stop the flow of blood more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and from the refill of the artery of it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone some cause of the ribcage, then incise that so that no abscess is cauterized.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with bandages and ligaments of cloth, and then cure it with unguents until it is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there are some old accidents or chronic catarrh, due to humid and agronomic qualities in the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing to those, and it is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine and that does not concur, then we have spoken about these maladies, extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient's reason loses the skin which is in the temples; and it tends to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden until few homes due to vehemence of friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some bandage; and then make a hole in the place with a sharp instrument or evacuate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatula of which this is the shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scrape the codename in that which is facilitated into the artery; and then get into the intestine and extract that from the upper parts into which you extract that from the codename and discover that of the tunics which are left there, from the whole part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Perhaps the artery is subtle, then envelop that in the extremity of the ounce, and then incise that one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and constricted, and there will not be a flow of blood, because if they are not incised they will not push out the blood at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood from twenty veins. into three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you ligate that in two places with a double strong band or cord at length, and do not touch the putrid decay within the consolidation of the plague and obstruct the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do that at that hour or then another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a cutellar cautery so that the extremities of it are incised, and stand in place of that same work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work because the patient has fever or is of complex complexion; for cautery is of those causes that help the final humidity, and thus it is better in judgment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to extract the arteries that fill the place of ancient custom, and they are placed decently on the pulses, and then are cured with secret medicines that make the flesh new and heal the wounds so that it is healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if meanwhile you work on another occasion to stop the flow of blood from the artery, then you touch to restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or that fills the place of custom, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the finger on the place so that the blood is congealed, and moisten the place with water of vehement coldness so that the acute pain rests, and it is strengthened according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is more suitable in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cuttles, because you have touched the two places with tension, and paused sometimes, not igniting, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it is elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the sharpness of the two cuttles together.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Perhaps emperor if it is sharper with two cuttles it is better, because if they are agitated together with two cuttles properly on each friction, and do not incise the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Then with those it is some greatness, it holds the heat of fire in those and the flesh is separated more lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all work and more lightly.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And it is the space which is between two cuttles the quantity of the greatness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the cure of body of sharp and acidic humors of the wells.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the humors are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the cap before, and do not find in that any cause of the cure by medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in the dry front of walking thus as if they were walking with formicas, and the wells of that are extinguished, humidifying thus that already their skin is constricted, and the eyelids are scabbed by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient groans mixed in the cure of those of this operation, and no one mentions that cure in space.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to raise the skin which is on the dry front, and then incise in the front three fissures equally distant according to the length of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third of the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two layers, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both the mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three digits adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge apparelled or secret threads much with which they extract the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	It is part of the temple that enters into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract the whole codeine that is between two incisions on the spine, which is above the bone, and then make a small incision entering into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then insert a spatula into this space and enter the first incision with another instrument called a cutter, one part of which has a hook and the other part does not have a hook.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And stop the bleeding of that hook which is near the annexed flesh of the codeine, and the bleeding of the lion's tooth within the bone, and fill in so that it reaches the smaller fissure, and separate all those veins that descend from the head to the wheels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It is better to continue the incision up to the codeine, and then make a small cut in the smaller fissure into another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And then correct the flow of a certain quantity of blood, express the places of the congested blood's passages.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then stop in each fissure a warm compress of cotton wool, and place it above those swollen veins that are inflamed with pus and oil, and take care not to cause an abscess with caution.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or tepid water, and then cure it with a gentle anointing of basilicon ointment and other remedies so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the cure of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending from the top parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there comes a catarrhal flow and it continues, and sometimes the patient's eyes are slightly extended, and already their gaze is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and because of this the skin is rough, and in the front of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent tension, then we know through this accident that the materials and catarrh do not come from many veins of the top parts, but rather proceed from.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that place at the middle of the forehead, a small one for the width (and start from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple; and make an incision into the bone; and extend your hand between the fingers of the temples which are numb from mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or absorbent cloth, and then refill between the two lips of the fissure with cotton wool or absorbent cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen below with swollen veins in pus and oil, so that they do not cause an abscess with caution.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove that and see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until it reaches the new flesh, and then cure it with a regiment of dry poultices which make the flesh new, thus as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony and mix them, and make an emplaster and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the cure of that which falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, whether it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus as iron and copper, or it is from a plant thus as cypress or fava, or it is a fluxing cause thus as water and vinegar and its similarity, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when peyra falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if sometimes the peyra, then distill it into some cause of violet oil or sizzami, and administer the extraction of it, and make the sternutation with conditi, and open the nostrils for the advent of sternutation.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then stop in the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts below, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not evacuated, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtiles, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten in the gesti, good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not forgotten through that, then make a tube of iron and insert the extremity of the tube into the tract of the ear and close the environment of the tube with wax and oil mollified so that nothing passes except the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it from the tender vein with strong attraction, because many evacuated matters are gathered with that which we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take of alum bat or of prepared vessel with which the vessels are pressed together in a certain quantity, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelop it decently stopped with cotton.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then you will insert that into the channel of the ear to facilitate it, and then remove the ear's moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	So then if you have not forgotten all the causes that we have recounted, then you will touch that tooth with a pointed cauter or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of touching that is that you at the beginning sensibly open the patient's vein and extract the blood according to the manner of their vertigo, and then make a circle between your fingers and convert the ear to the upper parts, and find a small fissure in the radix of the ear from which the grey matter flows into the place previously prepared.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And it is the lunar-shaped fissure that leads to the rock, and, the rock being opened, you will find if you can apply an appropriate instrument; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause resides in the ear and is one of the fats that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own judgment, then take subtle spatula tuned according to this form.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that the abscession of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not think that it is humidified by the vapor of the ear, and place it in many small pieces, and try to extract them with the nails or with a subtle gesture, or as if by inscizio, as I have said, because the extraction of it is alleviated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered into the ear, it is necessary to use sternutation at the beginning, and fill the entire ear with a great deal of warm liquid, and pour over that ear in which there is water, and if it is forgotten, well; and otherwise, then take three small stones and lions according to the length of the finger, and heat them in a little fire, and the patient inserts one of those into the channel of their ear and sounds above on one side of that part and percusses with another stone over the stone which touches the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not cease until all the water is forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water will be forgotten, and you will take paper or cotton wads. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the fire until it is burned, the wax of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another cotton wad and make as many turns until all the water is forgotten, and pull out that with a cannula, just as it is said of the extraordinary stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, thus pierce and to its likeness, cure it thus as we have said in the division; but if it is a great thing which causes pain at the time of evacuation, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and nails, and the cause of it is put lighter than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confound your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle nails, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula straight and wide, of which this is the form.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can suffer; and then suck with force, and make many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey your own judgment, then stop and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer the distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is your effusion which you infuse with medicinal oils in the ear with this instrument of which this is the form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of copper, straight, in which there is a small channel, and with a plate on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it is how they fill what is in the cavity of the cannula, to be necessary here onwards.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and envelop it decently in the extremity of the cannula, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want to put in the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with warmth above and express your hand, which has compression tempered until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And it is necessary that what has infiltrated in the auricle be scraped off at the focus with a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you have distilled in the auricle is not too frequent, for ear medicines do not suffer what is there.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of obstructions of the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some blocked passages in the ears of those who are not pierced, and it happens to some people, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a plague or flesh growing there; and this obstruction is made in the precipice of the ear canal which does not allow the evacuation, and some blocked passages are in the fore-part.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in its precipice, which does not allow evacuation, is among the major dispositions of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one where you achieve evacuation, it is necessary that you apply the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it carefully.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if an apparent obstruction occurs, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it is where the latitude is small, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatula should be of two gentle lions so that it does not cause lesion to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or in its middle, then you should cut subtly and incise vigorously to facilitate entry so that all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the precipice of the ear, then take a subtle lion's root and scrape that with a small flame, and place it in the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you feel an obstruction there, which the patient feels bothered by, due to the gravity of the humor, it forces the oppression there; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a dressing on the ear, wrapped with linen according to the quantity of the width of the canal which you have enveloped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a saucepan and pulverize over the ground tristan and use it; and if the ear is already apostemed, then it is necessary that you extract the water and permute it with another water which you have enveloped in wax that has been roasted, until it is the aposteme carefully heated; and then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Moreover if there occurs a flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another remedy that restrains the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of atrophies which occur in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atrophies that occur in the eyelids of those who have some blocked passages, some blocked passages are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then it is necessary that you hold those in a warm place or in a bath, and soak them in their own roots, and then place a dressing on the affected areas, well ground.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Moreover if there is pain with a flow of blood coming, then you should cauterize those areas with a subtle lancet-like cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the incisions and blocked passages return when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of cataracts that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Some blocked passages occur in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is assembled with cataract in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called cataract.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of thick humidity in the upper and lower eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation in them is that you should consider then if the cataract is proceeding in it from what appears on the eyelid and is manifest to the entire part; and the cause of it is sluggishness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision above it with a width, and then scrape off the entire affected part to facilitate evacuation, and then suspend it in a warm bath and separate it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Moreover if you do not make the incision of it properly, then you will not be able to penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, and then that will not be noticed in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that because the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the cataract is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the inner surface, then you remove the eyelid and suspend the cataract in a warm bath, otherwise you indicate an incision, and prepare that for the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, that will not be noticed in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and take care of the area where it becomes enclosed so that it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the treatment of abscesses under the eyelid from the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Abscesses are greyish in color which are generated in the membranes of the eyelid, and they greatly affect children, aggravate the wounds of those who have them, and cause their eyes to itch; and they cannot gaze at the clarity of the sun because of the bitterness that is caused by them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you should often wash their faces all the time, and their faces sleep; and so under their eyelids you will find humid membranes, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of apparent ulcers in the wound; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel apparent ulcers.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some manner of operation is in that which the patient pauses his evil humor in the finger, and then pauses a drop of liquid from it and of the warm water, and makes a circle according to the quantity that contains arthritic matter from the whole affected part, and then places it on that and presses with fingers all around so that ulcers are aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then feels in the middle of that humidity incident in the fissure through the latitude, and the fissure is not larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	You should rather cover the whole wound with a bandage so that you prevent ulcers from forming, because in the aforementioned processes ulcers form through fissures according to the shape of white greyish matter.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that matter with drops which you have enveloped between the fingers and parts of the fore and turn between the right and left hand so that it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not touch the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the wound and touches only that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if your ulcers do not appear at the beginning of the fissure, but rather you touch the fissure with a small facilitated instrument so that it processes the ulcers; and then extract that matter as we have said; and then mix drops of liquid in water and wine and place them on the area and strengthen those powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus you will find that they draw out salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if there are aposteme boils on the spot, then treat them with cold emplasters until they are healthy.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of touching wounds.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of wounds there are natural pustules and so antiquated, then those wounds do not heal and become ways of evil humors thus with assiduous tears and mollification of eyelids and skin until it is cause of destruction of the wound that is called touching of the wound, and it is treated in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched through incision and suture; or with canes as you have already said.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then cover the head of the evil humor in your finger; then convert the eyelid of the wound with your left hand, and if it is converted, good is; and if not, insert a needle in that part where there are pustules under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate under the pustule, and it will be — near the edge of the eyelid where the pustules are — near the pustules, and pull the thread to the upper parts above the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then feel in the affected part of the eyelid under the pustules with a spatula incident to the large lacrimal duct up to the smaller one; and then extract the thread and place it under the eyelid with small powders of cotton or drops, and then sew above the eyelid with a tent, and it will be thus like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because that has been diversified in humans, because of those it is indicated that a large quantity should be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then feel with the spatula on the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the large lacrimal duct up to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near the natural pustules thus like the largest tumor of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onion on one of the two angles of the wound, and then excoriate that entire area, and then adjust with a scalpel the two labial lips with a subtle thread or wool, and remove the blood, and make it adhere so that what is superfluous of the threads above the eyelids in some envisioning causes, if you want to do that, and if not, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And you should leave the stitches on the fields for three or four days, and then take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you want, leave the wound with its stitches, and take care of it so that it dries and contracts, because the eyelid is lifted from the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but the stitch is better. Therefore, you should not touch the taxes of the surrounding skin.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	You will find that it is solicitous above the patient, and it is a good operation, and it is not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it is another manner of examining, and it is that you sense above the eyelid figure thus as a mirror of the eye, and then lift the eyelid by three inches separate and congregate according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do so, hold the inches, and it is not bent, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other end near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other end near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between the tendons of the two eyes equally, and then elevate your hand in elevation, elevate the entire code above which you sense thus as having recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound to stitches, and take care that it is healthy inside.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if you find an abscess from your incision or your fissure, then that abscess is with wax and it resembles it, and it is enswaddled.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some vegetables are applied to the eyelid that the wise men convert, then you should use in that of it which we have said about incision; but the stitch is sometimes more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To examine with a candle as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is hidden according to what has been recounted; and then by artful skill do two candles or two subtle astrolabes of which the longitude will be according to the longitude of the eyelid and the latitude of theirs will be smaller than the latitude of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have made incisions in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add certain subtleties under that which superfluously flows from the eyelid of the wheel, and construct the candles of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and leave it for some days, because the code for the morbid structure will be denied and it will be poured in until you measure yourself falling.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut the skin with the scissors, and then take care of the wound until it is healthy.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Since it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the wise men do not puncture.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method of two candles which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it has the quantity of longitude and latitude neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of piercing wise men in the wheel with a needle when the wise man is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural wise men, hard and asperous and piercing the wheels, then the operation in it is that you take a subtle needle and pause on that delicate thread of silk and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and make some subtle movement in a subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And it is the longitude of the threads of the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you combine another subtle thread below it in brief, and knot the extremities of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then pause the patient's head in the tendon, and it is proper of the sun for your work to be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted wise man which has need of ingenuity, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract it beneath the natural wise man.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the wise man from beneath and introduce it into alignment, and be the wise men one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand so that the wise man is dislocated from alignment in the eyelid with the natural wise man.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is dislocated from alignment and the wise man is not guided, you will dislocate alignment at the divided parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until it is guided to alignment of the upper trajectory.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you will see that in the vision of the wheel, because then you will guide alignment and the thread, and you will bind some and close the wheel, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the wise man adheres to his place and is born above good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if it is more brief the wise man, then you adjust a long wise man of the natural wise men, and it is elevated in that, or that it remains until it is aligned properly with some space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the care of evacuating the humor which is seen in the eyelid beneath.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the vein in the eyelid is constricted, and it is opposed to the eyebrow when it is contracted on either side, right or left, for bad consolidation of plague or of section or of cautery, and it is called leprosy, and this constriction is natural or accidental, and it is done for consolidation of plague or of sections or of cautery, or for semblance to their evil habit.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Maybe the manner of the operation is that you perform that consolidation and separate the lips from it, and pause in it what is between them a kind of drawing of liquid, and bind them together so they are healthy.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not cover that you use for the cure of it from the causes which are exhausted, constricting; because if you do so returns to the bad state worse than never having had health.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which soften thus with fenugrec, and imbue water in which are cooked altea and essence of it, or inject dyaquilon, which is liquefied at the alcove of the joints, and submerge in that measure, and cure in that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce totally into a whole that is not consolidated according to the form that you began with.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described, is not but some rectification of bad alignment that does not return the form of the place according to what was beforehand.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	About the cure of bad alignment which is done on the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This bad alignment which is done on the eyelid below, which is naturally called bad alignment; and it is either a natural one or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Bad alignment caused accidentally by plague or by section or by cautery or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation is that you take a needle in which you make a double filament, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the filament penetrates into the two extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the upper parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into a spatium of ample size.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if it returns to the shape of the eyelid as it should be; otherwise, take the thread and pause it in the figured end, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And they are the extremities of the two fissures at two angles of the incision, which have been made so that they converge, and they are of their made angle until when they gather together they form the figure of theirs.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then lift the flesh for the quantity that is the width of the lower eyelid below it, so that you see the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of wool; and then cure it with what we have said about the softening medications and poultices until it is healthy.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if bad alignment occurs through fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the cure of bad alignment when it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of bad alignment, and that is in various forms of diverse motivations.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsmen always prepare everything in whatever manner is possible to return the figure to its natural form, or near it, and that evil according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	About the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many homes in such a way that the eyelid is solidified above the album of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facilitation of movement and of its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it in its own, or stretch it to the nail.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion into a subtle spatium, which is not at the point of the incisions, having obtained an obtuse little hole so that the evil is not disturbed by the operation, and remaining with the spatium that does not lead to the eye in its acuity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And it is your incision that excavates that adhesion to facilitate until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the eye salty water in which you wash; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of it, and place on the eye a woolen cloth infused with album of egg, and then use three days of causes consolidating until it is healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	About the inflammation of a nail and the prominence of flesh around the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that a nail is affected in two ways, either it is nervous, and resembles a subtle dryness; or it is non-nervous, resembling a white congested humidity, which when touched, or it is forced to take hold of it, is abscessed and the onychia is not fixed in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not come out except from the larger tear gland, which goes in little by little to cover the sight and prohibits the light and movement of the wheel.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to operate in the inflammation of the nail is that the patient holds their head in the same position, and you operate on the wheels of it, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail on the edge of a little duplicate extension and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into a horsehair or a bowstring or a vaqua, or similar things, or a strong file, or duplicate the extremity of the little needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind it to the nail; and extend it to the upper parts, and extract it from the skin at the side of the nail, which closes the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will follow it into the skin until you reach the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you will inject the remedy into the root of the eyelid with a subtle spatulum or small forceps, and lift the flesh of the eyelid naturally so that by injecting it, you do not induce continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or has a file, thus we have said, and then it must be excavated with a lion-shaped spatulum, from which this is the form of it.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatulum you do not touch the corneal tunic and that it does not induce a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the inflammation to the wheel with a little of triturated salt or of sieved ceruse, and let it be until another day; and then cure it with what covers it so that it may be healthy.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, nor is it fixed in the onychia, then many times this species of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I have written and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to operate on it, then you open the wheel of the patient and take a subtle lion-shaped spatulum with a very sharp point, according to this form.
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rarefied and congealed and takes hold in the root, then distill from your work in the wheel of sieved ceruse or of rough ceruse or of triturated salt, and apply the wheel until another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is of it is removed, but not so that a contrary abscess remains in the wheel, because then you leave it, and cure from the beginning the abscess until it is healthy.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healthy.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the eyelid flesh, if you notice it in the wheel for great benefit, suspend it on the onychia; and inject it from that one part, and do not finish the injection so that you do not induce flows of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill in the eyelid rough ceruse and sieved ceruse until it is healthy.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the inflammation of a certain abscess and of what is born from adjusted flesh in the wheel.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some growths in the wheels of some eyes are born from rough flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forces them to compress the eyelids at the front and it is assembled like a rose of balcony.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in it is that the patient holds their head in the same position; and then you operate on the wheels of it and collect all that flesh on the convenient onychia, and take hold of it with a forceps or a chest; and then inject the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wheel that you do not deviate from your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And it is your injection in which you inject those or with the spatulum that we have recommended in the injection of the nail, or with small forceps that collect the ascites according to what will be the form of it, as we will see in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When your injection is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wheel with triturated salt, or distill in it rough powder and similar to the corrosive medicines, and apply it over the wheel beforehand like a coat of albumen until it is assured against abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if you find some cause of gout in the heel and it is anointed with holy oil, and they have apostema wounds, then lift up the heel and cure that apostema wound in such a way that it ceases to be an affliction, and afterwards apply heat upon the affected area until it is healthy, and similarly make adjustments to the flesh so that it adheres to the heel of this special case.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Perhaps you will find that total cure of the heel fracture occurs naturally or accidentally, it works with iron, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently strong to undergo that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the heel.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus that comes out rough and thick, which is tested on the heel and prevents the healing of its operation, and it develops the heel over a long period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the heel on which there is pus is strong and in it there is no other ailment except pus, then you collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place their healthy cap in the tieu seat, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle double-layered form according to this method:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two ounces gradually in a vase according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then you collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and you extract the holy hour at that hour, until you see those veins being freed from the heel and are revolved.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not lead the heel to the extremities of the spatium; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not insert except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you distill on the heel clear water or red wine so that you may acquit the corroding quality that is removed from the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Perhaps it is not possible for you to collect everything at that hour, and then you apply a plaster to everything that ceases the pain of it, and lift it up for some days until the pain of it is calmed and it is assured of holy apostema.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then apply heat upon it according to the method that the doctor will manipulate until it is healthy.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the fractures:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of aristati to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat aristati with a cautery or with acute burning medicine according to what is previously described about it and it is not healthy, then it is not engendered in it except that you make an effort over the apostema until the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is discovered and it appears in it corruption or blackness, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named an aspere cap, and it is made of iron indeed, and the cap is rounded thus as to make it pointed for pointing with lime or alkali for subtle pointing (thus as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And stop that on the corrupted place of the bone, and then you rotate it between the fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then it will be made with some evacuations, and then you restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the place is consolidated and it is in good flesh and it has absorbed the body of the wound and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostematized and it does not accide in the accident, then you know that it is healthy.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in the engendering but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you discover from second bone or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take a tribe according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	It is the extraction of the iron triangle, and the staff of it is first extended until at the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then stop that on the bone, and it is that prop of the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the heel, and then revolve your hand with the tribe until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels it for so long as it arrives to heal, and that sends vent to sir per so that you know when it is healed.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore then restore the place with astringent medicines, drying thus as I have described.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and the place are indurated, then the matter which was poured out to the divided parts before returns to the nose, therefore it is easier to treat the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel eminates in its entirety and does not accide in the nuisance or diminution, then you believe that it alleviates the patient, and then you follow, and then you stop ventoses on the cervical scarifications and suck for good suckling; and then you stop on the heel with liniment made of acatra and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then you strengthen the emplaustre over the heel with many poultices.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of taking poultices is to take four wraps of linen cloths, and each wrap should be doubled in four places; and make them from those cloths.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that each has needed for its cure.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then stretch over them a strong wrapping with a firm structure; and afterwards apply cups to suck out the bad humors; and then remove the cups and let the bad humor be evacuated day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Perhaps the ligament is softened, then it should be covered so that it does not become too relaxed.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the bad humor has been reduced, well and good, then afterwards apply the plaster to the poultices and the structure and the cups until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	About the inflammation of the prominence of the tunicate vein.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunicate vein, and it becomes prominent and protrudes outward beyond the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape is altered for that reason, and you want to operate on it, then the operation is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the root of the vein at the upper part below, and then put another needle in the double layer of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and let the first needle follow its direction; and then inject into the area of the double layer and lift it away from the part of the vein in the circle of the needle, and stretch it strongly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then extract the needle and place it on the bad humor that has been infused into the white of an egg, and let it be until the thread is absorbed into the vein.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal the bad humor in that which comforts it until the wound is healthy.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some vegetables are added to the entire area in a circle of cloths until the bad humor is greatly adjusted, and then it should be perforated with a subtle spatula that comes to the head of the bad humor, and correct the albugineous humidity, and descend the bad humor and enter as soon as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	About the cure of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This bad humor that is called an ulcer is not but a sane humor that is adjusted in the similar bad humor, like descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Perhaps the manner of operating on it is to make the bad humor rise over the prepared and straight surface, and then take the dry cap in your hands more than two parts and mauve until you see the sane humor pervading the lower parts, and then it should be dried and not descend, and the light should be stopped, and the bad humor sees the causes thus far.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	Perhaps if it is not prepared to descend to the sane humor as we have said, then make the bad humor rise between your hands and take a subtle spatula and spin it over the panniculus circle surrounding a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva in the corneal circle (within the place you see), until the sane humor is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then since it is forgotten, then you distill the bad humor into the water that flows in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be cured by the other causes until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22. (Note: It seems that there are no more lines to translate, so this might be the end of the text.)
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	About the cure of the descending water from the bad humor.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have said the species of the water in the division and what is convenient to perform with the declaring sermon, then that according to the sanity.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is necessary that you make the bad humor rise between your hands over a hot brick and bind the dry bad humor there, with a very strong motion.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place near the eyelid of the dry bad humor your left hand, if the bad humor is on the left; or with your right hand, if the bad humor is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the emetic, if the bad humor is on the left; or with your left hand, if the bad humor is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the extremity of the emetic near the circle for the greatness of the vein in the white of the bad humor from the part of the lacrimal gland, and then inject the emetic into the vertebrae and rotate your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the bad humor and feel that the emetic has already been conveyed to the cause, which is seen.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measurement of the path of the emetic be at the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the circle of the bad humor; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the bad humor through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then stop the magic in the place where the water is, and you put the tar in a vessel below, and thus if the water descends quickly, then the patient will soon recover their sight, and the magic will be in the sieve above.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you put away that other vessel before the magic is touched.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the magic with ease, and turn around that little hand of yours a little at a time, and dissolve in the water a small crystal clear gemstone salt, and in that lava the whole dentition; and stop the flow of the oil infused with rose and album of wood and ligature around that whole thing.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	We, however, who are of our time, place above that as a compress wrapped in album of wood.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey the magic at the entrance of the hole for its hardness — because it is the alcove of the men whose hole is very hard —, then take the spatula which is called the aluminum tool, of which this is the form.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce at that conjunction, and do not ultimately put your hand in the tract, and it is not so that you make a way to the magic place subtly.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the magic according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And receive the complement of your work, prepare the patient's dormitory decently made in which they sleep above the sieve with two mattresses in dark obscurity, and be prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And stop in the nature of that water so that its nature is cleansed, and do not move the sieve head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And be the binding according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then dislodge that in that dark mess and expel the clear sight, and do see some causes, and then return the binding within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not take that as doing it at the hour of the cures or then stop the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You will find that you estrange that water so that it will not flow strongly and vehemently with great regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	We however accelerate the postema carefully, then you take out the hole within seven days, and rectify that which remains of the water that gives postema.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you absolve the sight of it and stop on the face of its orifice for which the vegetation of the days is ruled, it exists in the dark mess.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then be freed from that dark mass gradually and converse with its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in the slate it is not excused to omit some vessels, and then you will be hard about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now we have arrived at some of those which are in the Artach, and it is said that they make fire in the Ayrc magic perforated with which the water is succeeded.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	We however found not in our land the one who has perfected that water, nor is it legitimate in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magic for which they are above those ones which ignore them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or of proprietary iron, and they are the extremities of their love in this subtle triangularity, the acute extremity thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the healing of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born diverse flesh wounds adjusted from which some cause is assembled to scorpion of many pains, or to a polyp of feet; and this bad condition is called polyp because it is similar to that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of them is flesh cancerous, scabby, of dark color; and of them it is that the flesh is not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that which is in these non-fraudulent and non-cancerous flesh, take the patient to sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and open their nostrils, and prick the tender spot once in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the divided parts beforehand, and then insert it so that you have comprehended of those I will spatulate with a subtle instrument within one part until you know that all the flesh is restored; because if it remains of none of the causes from which the abscess is possible, then you will remove it with one of the subtle instruments facilitated within, so that none of the causes remain.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	We however master the saint or accelerate postema carefully, then you stop at that water which takes; or it is of the malignant postemas, then you cut and cauterize that within so that it be absolved saint and all the cavities are restored.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then be gotten in the nose, then stop the insertion of the vein agreeably with water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	More often if the nose is opened and its processes are humidified inward into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that nothing is being done in the purulent matter of the nose's ossified passages which have not received absorption.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then it is necessary that you feel the pulse of the patient to see if there is some thickness, and examine the nostrils, and pause between each breath to measure the quantity of the digit or month, and diagnose the patient and insert an extremity of the pulse into the nostrils at the edge of the radius or at another cause which is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then you will have made, that you attract the sieve's ornament into the canals of the nose, and it is situated over the sieve's gully, because many vain attempts seem to make sense in this action, as if children are playing at school, and it is a useless cause for one who does not want to do.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the pulse, one extremity that is placed over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a gentle serration of flesh on the nostrils which are in the pulse, and do so inwardly until you know that the flesh is already in the nostrils of the pulse.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the pulse, and pause in the nose to extract an abstraction of blood a little water, and do so for three days or more until you know that the entire corrupted thing is removed from the carnal.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you have reached a crisis point in the cure that is exhausting, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument called "capipurge" which makes the distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or copper, which resembles a small lamp opened, thus with a small container, and the middle similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube thus as a cane, and the canal of the instrument called "capipurge" is flat, uncovered; which is handled in the back of it, with which you hold that when you extract oils or whatever you want from the juices and causes succulent.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this "capipurge" is precious: recipe of infusion of castor oil, white lily root, ginger, and saffron, of long pepper, of scorpion's tail, of petum of spicy anise, and uncle. You combine juices of bladder and cabbage, and make them into pills, and dissolve one pill in tepid water, and inject it into the nostrils of the patient sitting opposite.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	The veins that are born in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many vain attempts are born in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnificent and mentioned for several days until when a word is legible from the regard of it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause over the place or apply a burning medicine which was in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the infection is delayed until it is magnificent, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sensation, then do not touch that iron quart because it is a cancerous aposteme; because many vain attempts are made to infect this aposteme everywhere for great malice over that which it had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of a gentle touch and not of dark color, and sometimes the infection is possible in all of that, then evacuate the patient and infect them without fear, and cure the place with what is extracted and constrained until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About the suture of the nose and the lips and the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by resemblance.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when you make a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few conferees are made in that operation except in some houses.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then it is necessary, when you reach some cause of those, to consider if it is fresh plague with the healthy sieve, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made sane, then it is necessary that you extract some part of its apparent coding until it is not healthy.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and on those sprinkle healthy dragon's blood and essence of threefold, and pause over the powder a piece of emplastering diafinicon, or of some other of the consolidating emplasters, and leave that liat for two days or three, and then dislodge that and permute that emplaster and leave that until the veins are absorbed, and then cure with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The greatest mastery of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with ague threads thus as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with faithful threads thus as you and make yourself knowledgeable.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come into the two lips in the divided parts of the teeth.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Softened masses go to make homes in the divided parts of their lips, near the apostemic ulcers that resemble fat errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then you should convert the lips and separate each of those hardenings from the entire part, and apply the abscess umpliscas to the place of the threefold drawing in, so that the blood may be restored, and apply it with a gentle agreement and heal the place where it is stipulated, so that it may be sanated.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A great deal of softened matter forms over the adjusted flesh in the gums, which the ancients called albumen, then it is necessary that you suspend that matter with an onion or that you hold it with forceps and incise it to its root, and let the healthy blood flow or the sound blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then stop on the place of threefold drawing in, or other stippled or excitant powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About the reason for teeth being iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts of the mouth and of those in front and between the adjusted gums, there are scorched, rough, and blackened masses, and some are citrine or greenish, so that the gum is corrupted through that decay and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then it is necessary that you make a separator between your hands and pause the head of it in the tieu seat, and extract the teeth in which those scorched masses and causes appear resembling sand, so that from them no root cause remains, and that makes the blackness and citrinity and other things that are mondified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if that is the state of affairs at the beginning of the reason, well; and if not, then you iterate the reason over those to another day and to the second and to the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have needed various forms of roots and figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore because the roots are those that the tooth is rooted in the divided part of the mouth are other than the roots that are rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots have been prepared by you, which you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	About the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should cure the tooth of its pain entirely and quickly in total eradication of it, because there is no cause that supplies the matter of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance that excuses itself in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	However, you should be certain when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, because firmly you must be certified which is the painful tooth, because many matters of pain deceive the patient and think it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, because we have not seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then how do you certify which is the painful tooth, and what do you know, then it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of the entire part, and then mau with those tieu digits, or subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concurs.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then put something in the strong tooth-holds for good loquacity or strong estuption, and pause the head of the patient between the denolh tieus that you hold so it does not move, and then extract the tooth according to rectitude in a mastery that you do not tremble, nor does the patient feel major pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it there in the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it thus as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete the drawing of that trauma and strengthen it with a subtle extremity of ray so that it is not trapped in the hour of your construction over that hold.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you operate with precision in the scarification of the entire part of the gum and guard much your strength so that you do not tremble and remain parted from it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Be careful that you do not make the same mistakes as ignorant barbarian surgeons in their foolishness and audacity regarding the eradication of these, lest they administer what we have recommended; for many misguided treatments come to afflict the gravely ill patients whose cases are more difficult than those that have been treated, and the roots of their illnesses remain altogether, or some of them, or that you extract those bones from the mandible, just as many misguided treatments have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then eradicate it by washing the mouth with hot or cold salt water solution.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if you induce fluxes of blood for that purpose, just as many misguided treatments induce, then apply a certain quantity of poultices and aspergus upon the wound, and if that poultice does not confer, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps should be subtle as those that are made to extract a tooth from the beginning, with a long handle and thick, so that they do not bend when one has to operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they are also like times of thick handles that enter so that when one holds them in those, they do not bend, but are brief and extruded.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian iron, expertly made with extruded instruments, and in the extruded parts of those, there are teeth that enter one into another and hold strongly by constricted force, and some misguided treatments make the extruded parts in the shape of a bird's beak, which is called ciconia, so it is guaranteed, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from injured jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is injured by some cause, then it is necessary to apply pressure over the affected area with a bandage for a day or two until the area is softened; and then insert gently or hold the extruded instruments which are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia or guarantee, the shape of the forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extruded instruments of theirs are made of dentine, just like lime or alumbage.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey you at this time with these forceps or instruments, then it is necessary to cave in on the root and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument which has the name "atáli", it is a small lever whose shape is this.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be of brief extruded thickness, small, and not bent so that it does not get injured.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if the root is forgotten, well; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the shape of the first instrument is triangularly extruded in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a more subtle extruded part.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus you will be helped by this instrument having two slants of which this is the shape, suitable for the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the scraping of teeth; because juvenation is made with this instrument which is assembled to a large hook, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangularly extruded part, twisted or short, which has some thickness, and not bent so that it does not get injured.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing, the instruments of the teeth are moved similarly to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled artisans are wise and subtle in the art, attentive to their mate's needs according to what they mean by operation and various illnesses; because they are of the illnesses for which the ancients did not describe nor pause to use proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is injured, or if it is fractured, then cure it in its place with what is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have said are used in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with the gestures of which this is the shape:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be with some small thickness little by little, and let it be held or tied in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is entirely forgotten; and then restore the place with medicines conveniently adapted to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then scrape away that fracture and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course in that shape, and especially when they are induced in women, and especially in venerable old people; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not attached to another tooth, and there is no possible sawing or filing of it, then root out that one; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you remove it with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's bite, and made of Indian iron extruded very sharply.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	Be careful with your insertion into the mouth which is inserted in three days for the duration of the tooth, and that it not be confused with another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if an eminent tooth is exposed to a file, then file it with iron from India, of which this is the shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	It is all iron from India and the margin is ornamented; it is of many small points thus with file as the ones which are made agitated, as the tooth is filed little by little in many days to facilitate, so that no other tooth is confused and worn out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then apply those to the mouth, and scrape them with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is of which a part is loose and touches the tongue, then cover it so that you smooth out the roughness of that fracture, and let it be applied so that the tongue does not lead to it nor the speech corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of worn-out teeth with gold foil or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth fall out due to concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot hold on to what they eat, and you have treated them with medicines that are applied to the gums, and your treatment has not been effective, then it is so that they do not cough up what is stuck in those that are strengthened with gold foil and not silver, because silver becomes vert and soon deteriorates after a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the gold foil is in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the way of receiving it is that you take the gold foil and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuous layers of gold foil between two worn-out teeth, or one or more, until it reaches the web of the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then iterate the process until you reach the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not worn out.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And be your stretching which strengthens the gold foil against the roots of the teeth that do not evacuate.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the superfluous excess of gold foil with forceps or scissors, and add those to any place you gestured, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the worn-out tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave it thus, stretched out like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	However, if it is dislodged or roughened, strengthen it or them with other gold foil in such a manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two worn-out teeth, thus as often these are linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their place, and are re-established thus as we have recommended, and they remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not do anything but be skillful artisans and wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some bones of a cow are apt for certain causes, and it is made from them thus as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the insertion of the ligament which goes to the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which goes beneath the tongue sometimes occurs naturally in men who are born with it, or accidentally and suddenly due to a plague that has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in him is that you open the mouth of the patient, the existing tissue in the tie; and elevate the tongue, and then insert the nervous ligament according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retention.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	However, if in that there is some hardness or induration, and it has been established by consolidation of plague, then you inject an oil and divide it along the latitude until you have inserted the ligament and the induration is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not made a fissure in the prier of the flesh and that you divide here artery and vein, and blood flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the vestige of the incision with warm water or wine or cold water; and then pause beneath the tongue, licini; thus it is necessary that you hold the patient beneath the tongue in some night for so that it is not consolidated another time.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	However, if blood flows out, pause over the vitreous location thrice treated; however, if the blood stops, then cauterize the location with a cauterizing iron that is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with other causes until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes it happens beneath the tongue an abscess resembling a small swelling preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and for this reason it is magnificent until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on them is that you open the patient's mouth in front of the window and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see a dark or black color, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is cancer.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it declines to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onion on them, and insert that thin spatula, and insert the entire affected part; and if you see it coming out at the time of your operation, then you stop the three fingers, so it is vitriol, until the bleeding is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have treated the entire affected part, until it is washed with wine and salt; and take care of the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles and from that which is nothing in the gullet and from other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you find in the gullet a godat, so they are glands that are assembled in a godat, which accelerate beforehand and are named two auricles, which when you treat them as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that which is iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that which is iron for the flow of blood; but let it be until it matures, and then you will operate on it, or it will break for itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, radish-like, and its root is subtle, then that is what can be easily incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, during your operation, if already the abscess has rested with complete repose or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then do seize the patient in front of the window, and the head of them should be in the same place, and open their mouth, and the servant takes hold between their hands before the tongue of them, and holds an instrument most noble whose form is this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or copper, and should be subtle with a cutting edge.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you press it against the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and cuts above that in the same vein, then take an onion and place it on the wound, and pull it towards the affected parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another thing that you extract some cause from the tunics, and then you incise it with an instrument whose form is this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps, however the extremities of them are curved, so that the orifice of each one of those is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron indeed in a beaked shape.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your present, then you incise it with a spatula whose form is that of them: It should be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one vein, incise the other according to this same method of incision, and then make an incision on the patient's gums with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if you induce a flow of blood, gargle with water of decoction of sage or of mint leaves and similarly to those of the stopping causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then take care of it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some other abscesses are found in the gullet besides those two auricles, and incise them according to what you have said and done in the incision of two veins in the same way.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you had medicated a woman with an abscess which was born in her gullet, the abscess which tended to dark color, of little sensation, which had closed her gullet, and the woman breathed with great stridor, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was perceiving death if she had stayed like that for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had so swollen up that it had formed two ridges until they opened up through two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then you carefully opened it and placed it in one of their onions, and pulled it out, and extracted from the large portion, and then you incised that which you comprehended from the other tract, and then you opened their mouth, and comprehended their tongue, and then you placed the onion on the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you removed a large part of it, and no more blood flowed from it except a little.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the gullet of that woman was absolutely clear, and she began to drink water, and then she received viands, so you did not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and succeeded in incising it until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you proceeded to cauterize the gullet of them, then you added an antidote; and then you walked around and did not know that God had done it for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 38.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a tumor when it becomes swollen.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the tumor grows on the skin, and it becomes swollen and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a thick and round part, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Moreover, when it is cured in this way that we have said in the division, and your cure does not coincide with theirs, and sometimes it happens that the tumor has been removed from him and it is subtle, then it is necessary to incise those that are round and added; and if it is of long duration, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and it does not affect his sentiment, then it is necessary to fear the incision of him, because in this case there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the manner that you have been taught about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press his tongue with an instrument which processes its shape and then fixes the nail in the new moon, and pulls it down and incises it with one of two instruments which are said to be used in the incision of two membranes.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary not to incise it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term of its additions, because if you incise more of him, you will disturb his ability to speak.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two membranes, and cure it from within so that it may be healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Moreover, if the patient is frightened by the incision of him, it is necessary to use art in the cauterization of his fears, and the manner of the cautery on him is not only with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient in a straight position, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and make it come alive, and pause it neither sparse nor subtle, and of this complete the concavity of the instrument, the form of which is this.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	It is the extraction of the intestine from the cavity in which the medicine was placed, thus like the intestine of a ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient spits over his shoulder for so that corroding saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one does not interfere with the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not hinder any cause on his throat and that he is freed from that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then you place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it is degraded and seated by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take cotton and envelop it over the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and then insert the ray with the cotton into a hollow cane so that the cotton adheres to it, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then the cauterization will be abstracted in the circuit of the grape with cotton wrapped in a bandage, and manifest what is in the circuit of him from the medicine, and it is washed with cold water, and it is cured before embrocation, and freed from gargling until it is healthy.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this species of cure is more saving than incision and longer in duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are cured with the medicine that is more subtle than cautery and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: recipe calamint, ysop, origan, rue, scicados arabic, camomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, in a mixture, and they are submerged in a good wine, and boiled; and the mixture is well-cooked, and it is in a suitable place of the mixture, on which a conquering instrument of iron is placed according to this manner; it is made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth so that the vapor reaches the uvula over the cannula, so that the uvula is not too obstructed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat it on many wounds until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the coming of tumors, because it would too much adjust to the tumor, and it is not necessary to do this, but rather declare the tumor of him as cautious.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	Moreover, if you do not have this instrument, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of him in a closed space, so that the patient's mouth is combined, because the closed space of the cane prohibits the vapor from entering the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and of that which adheres to the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Soft tissues adhere to the vertebrae or spine of the feet or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you extract what appears obvious, on which the gaze falls, as you press the tongue with an instrument only solo, so that it may be declared what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, then you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the strong cause annexed to the throat will be purged by vomiting; or that the patient has eaten a piece of raw meat or of radish or a dry bread roll; or take a piece of marine sponge soaked in lion's fat, and tie it strongly with a thread, and then pass the patient through transgulated [areas], because when you perceive the place where they are spinning and extracted, then they will be purged.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take a eel and bind it with a strong thread, and place it on the table and subsequently extract it; or take a porpoise and subsequently extract the limbs and subsequently remove the entrails.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if not purged through those causes which have been said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it is so large that a small one is ruled out, and in the extremity of it is conquered the one that you introduce into its throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the old wise head is elevated in itself, and beware that you touch the bone of the throat, so that it does not deviate from its place or pierce the bone or the spine, or that the doctor places his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But however the patient introduces himself is better, for his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and he pierces within, and draws his hand with the instrument in himself, all according to the quantity which is prepared until it is purged.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood from the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is medicated in that which has been said in the division of the cure with medicines and not comforters, consider then the throat of the patient at sunrise, because you have comprehended the tongue of it with an instrument which you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you touch the blood, extract it with a small finger or with gentle and subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and introduce it into the throat of the patient, and place a pause in the concavity of the cannula with an ignited iron, and do so many times (until the blood is dead and separated from the throat) and abstain from giving the patient anything to drink for a whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of cold water, and hold the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not transgress from any cause and mix the water for an hour, then place your hand on theirs, because the blood is drawn out as soon as it feels the cold water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not purged through that which has been recommended, then suffumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida through the instrument which has been recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do it, for it is four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another manner of operation in suffumigation of that, which is to take an oil lamp in which are ignited carbons and the lamp is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a tube; and compose the extremity of the instrument in that tube; and then give below the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not purged until you know that the suffumigation has penetrated to the blood, because the blood is drawn out four days.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you iterate the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient drink, and eat salty foods and herbs, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed for purging.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it is in some curved shape:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed in the throat, and its extremity is similar to the beak of a stork, which is guarded, in which is inserted a file, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not escape.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the sermon on the perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to what you have remembered of them, from each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs through two manners, from which one is for the species of abscesses in their measures; and for that which is comprehended from the humidities.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is to prop up the affected areas of the body, because an abscess that forms in the head is different from an abscess that forms in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy area is different from an abscess in a joint; and each of them requires judgment for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And most of the abscesses are such that they do not require to be opened but rather await maturation of the sanies in those or completion of their development.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other abscesses are such that they require to be punctured when they become crossed, and do not mature according to their development, thus like abscesses that are near joints, because an abscess that affects a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can corrode the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it becomes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess of a principal member, and if you delay the puncturing of it until it matures, it will not harm the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, thus puncture the one that has not matured, due to incomplete digestion, but only the one that is near the buttocks, so that you do not prolong the pressure on it and it becomes elongated into the inner parts of the buttocks, and becomes a fistula, or it becomes an issue in the end of it that does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You should know the time for puncturing the abscess, and thus it is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is matured when there is reduction of pain and cessation of fever, and also decrease of swelling and pulse, and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And therefore you should know that puncturing is to be done in the place where the pus is below the abscess and where the pus comes out for a cure, due to the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And puncturing is always according to the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in places of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, finally, in all swollen places where there is no reflection; because in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Most of the time when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay puncturing until digestion of it is confirmed according to its development, as we have said; because if you puncture it then, it prolongs the body of the pus and of bad matter, and thus the lips of the wound become hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Most abscesses are punctured according to the latitude of the flesh or body that needs treatment, or according to what the affected member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you know that you should administer small puncturing, and in large abscesses a large and broad or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses are those in which you know that the codeina (skin?) should be cut and incised, when it is done thus, and it is in a term that already stiffens, like those that form in groups of douleness and bubbles.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus like the figure of a leaf of myrtle, thus like the abscesses of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them that are in those which are administered round section and lunar section, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Most of the time, that which is not able to be thus like superficial abscesses, you know that you puncture it with a superficial puncturing, or only plane it slightly.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And you know that when the abscess is large and has already collected much sania, that you puncture it and do not try to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a part of it, and then you open the abscess again another day, and then you extract a larger part, and thus you make the matter evacuated gradually until it is fully cleared.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And it is especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit is much resolved to evacuate the sania, and thus the patient will die, and you should open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	You should keep this chapter with great caution, and thus perform your puncturing in which you puncture these abscesses, knowing that you will clean the wounds and consider if the wound of the abscess is small, or it is a flat section, then you administer the remedies of oil or of anti-putrid matter; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncturing are many, then you know that you pause in some traction until they are fully cleansed.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the skin is detached or has concaved into the circuit, then you know that you complete it with much oil or with a flossing thread of linen, thus as when you have treated pans or razors, with humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and thus process it and cure what you know of the wounds until they are healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Mostly if you hasten the flow of blood in the hour of your operation, then administer cold water and wine agreeably in those muscles a cloth of linen, and pause it over the area of the blood flows most worn out.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	Maybe if you preserve the blood flows, then it is fitting that you administer regimen and cure and powder those which have been recommended in many places of our free book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	Maybe if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is fitting that you apply poultices with wine and oil cautiously, and pause them over the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then it is fitting that you pause poultices soaked with water and oil or wine and oil, and all that should be very cold until the third day, thus as we have said, and then it is fitting that you dislodge the abscess and thoroughly clean it and administer in the cure of what is convenient for it to be healthy.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus it is necessary to understand the cure of abscesses universally, maybe according to the way of distinction already said about all abscesses in which manner it is the way of curing them particularly for each singular head.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	About the section of abscesses which come on the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the nape of the neck small abscesses, and these are of species of knots which contain tunics that are at their fact; and the species of theirs are very many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them are pungent, and of those it is said that they contain humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those it is said that they contain humidity similar to poultices, and resemble them; and of those it is said that they are rocky, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since you must not make the extraction of those contrary to arthritis.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you spread them with an instrument in the form of which you have approached thus, which is called entromes, so that you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if it is said that they contain humidity, then you separate them in section according to the longitude per superficial section according to this form.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line .B. until the line .G. Therefore, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that which contains that humidity, and do not leave any of it for any reason, because very worn-out returns, if it remains from some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then you submerge it in Egyptian inguent, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with the plague and let it be until another day, because I believe that corrodes all so that it is removed from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then you iterate over that spot with Egyptian inguent secondly and thirdly if it is indicated for it, until you are confident that no skin remains affected by any cause of that skin; then cure the plague with inguent until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	at the section having form of a cross, and cut between two lips of the section and scrape all that part, and force your virtue in extraction of the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Maybe if you have arthritis that makes contradiction, then do so that you first reconsider primarily.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the abscessed section of the cure according to what you have said; and the section about the abscessed cure is less urgent, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some veins are like some of these abscesses which are on the head in some homes where there is no humidity; the cause is that you have incised upon an abscess on the head of an old woman and touched the abscess thus as a rough, bitter, white thing, which could not be extracted, and if someone was struck by it, they would plague that.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Maybe in the other abscesses that occur on the head besides this one, it is not about this chapter, thus as the abscesses that come on the heads of infants and one must remove the roots of the ears, maybe the section of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those from the lowest part of theirs for so that it is alleviated the pain of the wound at the lowest parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then cure them with what is convenient for their cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	About the section of scrofula which occur on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many worn-out abscesses occur on the neck and in the axillas and in the joints; and some worn-out ones occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur on the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all of that scrofula is beneath its proper tunic, and thus as in the knots and abscesses of the head, thus as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the special characteristics of these scrophulae are many, because some of them have rough surfaces, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find in good disposition in the Touching, of which the color that is manifest is close to the color of the codena, and it is joined to the whole part, and not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and not swollen, so that you insert it into the superficial incision of the part above to the part below the line of G, entering the line of B, and scoring all over the part, and extending both lips of the codena to eleven inches if needed, as we have said in the apostemes of the head, and extracting it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious not to cut into a vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is better to not move the spatulum, so that you do not adjust your hand in incision, or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; because if you cut a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then pause in the vetriol plaster trissat or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the wound, and lay aside that which rests on the quietness of the apostema and mollify the wound, and begin to be purulent.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is absorbed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then investigate carefully if there are any causes of the other small scrophulae, so remove them and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large scrophulae vein, then beware lest you do not cut that scrophulae from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Be careful lest you make a faulty double fold and let it fall so that it does not become inflamed.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with a lot of cotton which you have already submerged in Egyptian unguent, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out the entire scrophulae, then beware lest you adjust both lips of the wound and cauterize as soon as possible so that there remains no superfluous matter.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you think that there remains superfluous matter because of the greatness of the scrophulae, beware lest you understand to cut out the root of it, and separate it, and apply a suture, and do what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrophulae that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation here where it appears to you the place of maturation, and pause the perforation of what is dry below the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then apply perforation, with calves' unguent and similarly to those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound being cleansed, then you cure it with unguent of generating flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	About the section of the pilum of the accidental aposteme on the goulayre.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients made this section in the pilum, and we do not see any man in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in the men who have expertise, beware lest the extraction of the pilum is avoided, as if it is not done judiciously for fear that all the veins and major parts of the patient may be affected.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have apostemes in the mouth or goulayre or two aurelhas, when the malady is not in the cane, beware of using the section of pilum to avoid the loss which is made by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then beware when you want to do that, that you cut out the pilum below three circles of the circles of the pilum, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in the siphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from the son are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, beware lest he extends the cord of the goulayre to eleven inches, and then inserts the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut out the siphac according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the flux which is of that essence which is of the disorder and for the absorption of the wound.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And then leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add both lips of the cord of the wound, and sew it only to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And the doctor Albucasis says that the summary of the sermon he had recommended, is not just an exposition, but rather it seems that some of those apostemes have already opened the patient's belly, and the patient has entered into a mortal state, and their belly is being dissected, and some are going to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the area of the plague for some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, I command that the opened plague be consumed into the patient's belly, so that the evil of the disease may be absorbed; and it is the evil of the disease that will take three days; and therefore, I command thus the plague, and heal it within, so that it may be sanctified.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And this is what I have seen through my observations, that a servant holds a candle and places it in the hollow of the patient's belly, and inserts a tube into a part of the lung canal, and I have called it the cure of the disease, and I have hidden the pus as the dead do, and uncovered the plague and hidden the blood which was affected by the small plague.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I must confess that I had not inserted a vein nor guided it, and the wind came out of the plague, and I healed it within so that it may be healthy.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not hasten the servant if it does not re-enter into the belly, and then return to the improvement of their own dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about the aposteme that occurs in the belly before, and it is called hernia of the belly.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This aposteme called hernia of the belly is a great aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, because it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, it is not possible to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which the one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an aposteme that is made by occlusion of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not cover that which makes a presupposition about the iron except in the one that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you prove that and investigate as I have told you, and if you find it similar to fatty tumors, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then you insert it thus like the nodes, and extract the water that contains the fluid of the pellicle and bursicle; and otherwise, then it is thoroughly searched throughout the entire essence, and afterwards cure the place where it covers the cure within so that it may be sanctified.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of the species of tumors.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many species of tumors and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it covers that I recommend thus the difference between tumor and exostosis, as it makes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Then I say that with exostosis it is heat and fever and violent pains until the inflammation of the superfluity is sedated; and it is a complete putrefaction that then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with tumors it is not heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that cyphosis which is a ulcer in its own proper sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a cyst and it is made thus like a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, because one is fatty and contains humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then it covers, when you come to the cure of tumors, that you expose that and inquire into the beginning with an instrument called intromes, according to which you will find its form in the chapter that is about to be cited.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiry into apostemes and all tumors, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you find humidity in the aposteme, and you revolve the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the code.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And afterwards, you measure your hand according to the size of the greatness of the aposteme, and afterwards extract the intromes and consider what is left in the vestige of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the humidity has flowed out, of whatever color it may be, then you insert it into a superficial section according to what I have said about other apostemes.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the vestige of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And it cuts into it in a section having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus you will ensheat it, and suspend that in oncises, and excorticate the code of all parts facilitated, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract the sania from the tumor.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract the sania, and many things are seen at the end of that, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains of any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because of the Roman disease from some unknown cause, little or too much, the node returns according to the months.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the Roman disease has affected some small part, then complete the plague with some corrosive and acute powders, and pause on that which sits as a postmastectomy caution, and cure it from another curative entrance until it is healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you kiss the two lips of it and cure that which wraps around in flesh.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse comes to the contrary, or is non-pulsating, then you touch and fill the place of three triturations that are vitriol and let it stand for two days or for three until the plague is purged and the ebullition of the blood returns; and then return to scatter what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	About the necessary forms of instrumentation in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	About those which are the forms of introductions, and they are of three species, one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introduction is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium introduction is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introduction is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Made of iron, of aluminum, of decently prepared extremities, so that they fix the instrument in the apostemes.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experiences, and they are named altered, and one of them is called verified.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three species, because one is large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experience, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium experience, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experience, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they are for those apostemes and exits and fistulas and swellings, so that they enter among those of the bones and of other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made of roots, thick ones, lions, thus with large needles as those which are sewn on the seats, and they are made of iron citrine, or of iron or of steel, or of silver, And the best ones are when they are made of iron citrine.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of the experience of black lead, which ones are in accordance that they push out the fistulas in the cavity of those which are reflexive, that they are reflected with their levity in those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three species, because some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of the structure of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large experience of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium experience of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small experience of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the hooks are of many species, because some of them are simple, which ones have a single curvature only, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they are hooked orps, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they are hooks having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they are hooks having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple hook, form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium simple hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple hook, form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large hooked orp:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium hooked orp, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small hooked orp, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large hook having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium hook having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small hook having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large hook having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium hook having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small hook having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels which are those that cut and scrape the nodes and the apostemes, and they are of three species, because some are large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those which are made for sectioning so acutely and the other extremities not acute, and not paused in such a manner, but rather made to be joined in the excavation of the nodes the fear of incision of a vein or nerve, and for them to be healthy the patient and atroba tranquility a little for the adjustment which atroba gives to the excoriatio of the aposteme.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of emollients, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, thus with veils.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large emollient:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of joint pain relief:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of gout treatment for a few:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are the symptoms of the disease and its similar characteristics that I have written about.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the outer layers of the affected pointed joint and in that curved space between the divided and deformed parts, when you wish, thus as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of pointing joints, which are hidden among the fingers due to the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceive the evils, and they are of three species: large, painful, and few.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those ones:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventoses are those which obstruct the flow of blood, and they are of three species: large, painful, and few; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are the symptoms of the disease cited, rounded and somewhat longitudinal, and these are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these species of ventoses are your large, painful, and few, so that for those obstructing the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you primarily do not have medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, they do not use them to obstruct blood in every part of the body, and they only use them in fleshy places, thus as in the hollows of the legs and thighs, and in the hollows of the arms, and of the breasts, and of the belly, and of the groin, and similarly to their fleshy hollows.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some veins are affected by those other small instruments similar to thorns according to this form; through which the blood is obstructed when it is done by phlebotomy, or by cutting of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some veins are affected roundly according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some veins are inflated in the breasts of some men who take pleasure in sleeping with women, and thus their breasts are inflated, and they are similar to women's breasts, and Roman doctors say it is a sign of lechery.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who suffers from that, it is necessary to incise those in a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then to excise the entire ugliness, and then to fill the wound with medicated ointment, and then to adjust the two lips of the wound with cosideration, and cure the one who is inside until he is healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the lower parts and is softened by its magnitude thus as in women, then it is divided into two lateral sections with sublayers, with two sections similar to a lunar figure, each of which is contained in the other so that one ends where the other begins, until it is seen that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. And then excise the codena which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure until he is healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which is necessary to cut for the sake of the patient's quiet, and for the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive liquid and let it corrode what is rough from the grey matter, and then cure the one who is inside until he is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that come from beneath the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from beneath the nipple are of the species of scrophulae, hard, which contain a fluid that is sacred.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity it is necessary to incise them in a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is evacuated from the abscess of the sanity, then you complete the cotton veil and leave it inside for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cotton should be steady and be cured with a convenient ointment according to that, until he is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and scrophulae, then you should section above that thus as we have said in the section on scrophulae engulfment.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it the cautery according to what we have previously said about it.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of abscesses that occur due to artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery is broken, and the codena is consolidated which is above that, then many veins occur with abscesses. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: because when the abscess is due to the artery, it is often aggregated in the front of the body; and when you touch the abscess on the fingers, you feel a stridor in the vein.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And he who is affected by a vein is given a remedy for the apparent manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	The section above this abscess is an error, and it increases in those who are below the axilla, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is believed that the cure will be difficult, and he who is at the extremities, or at the head, should avoid it.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Maybe about he who is suffering from inflammation of the orifice of the artery, it seems that the section above the codena is obstructed in the lung; and then uncover the section with an incision and then open the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the agulha (needle) above that and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to extract the two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then push the place where it is between two ligaments with a spatula until you reach the blood that is in it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment where it is engendered poorly until the ligaments relax; and then take care of he who has convenient joints to reach healing.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to a vein section, then you should have your hand there where it is possible for the abscess in the codena, and then insert the needle below the place where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and it will be with a double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with both ligaments according to what you have been told about the ligament of the grape, which is two parts at the extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Maybe you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the thread into the needle below the entire abscess, from the incision of the primary needle, and stretch the tied threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then cut the abscess in the middle place of it until you situate what is in it, then you incise the superfluity of the codena, and thus what was linked to it is released.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then pause about the pus that has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment that is made with calves and joints until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus it occurs that an abscess in the artery and vein, and similarly an abscess in the nerves when it occurs from their percussion or occurs due to superfluous effort, and so on.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the manner of it in the places of the adjustors or of the sole, or in every place where the joints are affected.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and it is similar in color to the other body, and it is among the major dispositions of its own kind, when it is tightly bound with vehemence, as if in the patient there is a stupor-like malady.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the chest of the body, and therefore it is below the codena, and it has affected the entire partition and does not go to the parts ahead nor behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who are in the joints do not believe that it is possible to be cured with iron, because they strongly contradict the contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Maybe he who is at the head or on the forehead feels the codena with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Maybe if it is a small abscess, then you have those with forceps and extract it by its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it with an incision, and excavate it, and then remove it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 50.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of abscess that occurs from the swelling that occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It is even said that some people have many swollen abscesses in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal-like because of their similarity to fungi, whose root is subtle and the head of it is large; and already their lips are conversing, and it is about those who are small, and it is about those who are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in their abdomen there were two abscesses that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with a small root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already their lips were turned inward and were split, and humidity flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I incised those and applied a trotula to one of them in the form of 18 ounces. and the other one weighed 6 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation on their incision is that you consider then if the malady is humid, and the color of the abscess is white, humid, with a subtle root; then you incise it with a broad spatula, and thus in your presence you apply cauteries to the focus, because many swollen abscesses are expelled much blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is trembling with fear and terror, beware of inserting a hot iron; rather take a moderate amount of plum recent medicine, and strengthen it with that athereal, the manner of which we have described; and let it stand for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust it in the structure of the plum thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large plum grain that is deviated in the thigh, until it is absorbed and falls for its troubles.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the thigh is of great size, then in its insertion it is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in one who has a belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you are mistaken about its nature, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to insert into the thigh one that is of dark color, of little sensation, of lazy regard, for that is a cancerous abscess.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will find a remedy for cancer and I will then remember it.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of hernia near the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia near the navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the diaphragm which is above the belly, and thus the intestine or bowel follows according to the other ruptures; or by bleeding from a vein or artery as has been said before, or by constricted ventilation in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the diaphragm and a slipping of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is a lion-like pain, and then appears in diverse situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to an exit of the intestine, then the situation of that is like water that we have recounted, with more vehement diversity, and as you press on that place, it is hidden, and then returns; and thus it is in that place, and it is magnified much by the entrance of a bag and vehement trouble.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then it is a lion and is not hidden when you press on your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it created.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to bleeding, then the signs that appear are those of an abscess turning black.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to a lack of flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to constricted ventilation, then the touch of it is lion-like.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider then if the hernia near the navel is due to bleeding from an artery, or a vein, or constricted ventilation; then it is necessary to prohibit the treatment of it, because in that case there is fear and pain also as I have written in the chapter where I said about abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the hernia near the navel is due to the bowel or intestine, then it is necessary to command the patient to hold their belly still, and be standing upright; and then insert a tent in the circuit of the entire navel, and then command them to stand with their hands on their knees, and then encircle the space around the navel above the place where you have inserted the tent; and then extend the nature of the abscess to the upper parts towards an inch long; and then put it in the circuit with a strong thread or chain and the manner of the decent liar.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then you will find the middle of the extended abscess above the ligament and insert the said thread into that index finger and where it meets the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded by the ligament, then you extract the extruded matter and impel the intestine to the upper parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the intestine, then take it as a unit; and remove the superfluous parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that much, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a manner of a cross, which makes them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts above the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the extended flesh is consolidated and falls for itself; or remove what is subtle and falls away, and then cure it with water that is suitable for healing the wounds until it is healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the hernia near the navel is due to a lack of flesh in it or moisture, then it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as I have said and expel the bleeding or moisture, which you find in it, and then cure it with water that is suitable and consolidates the place.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	I have said, in the division, of a species of cancer and in what manner it is via a treatment of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid ulceration; and I have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution of its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	They described the ancient remedies that some experienced doctors used in places where it was possible to eradicate it, and thus with a crane-like device on the chest or thighs and similarly on the limbs allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it starts to feel a little better.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	Perhaps when it is chronic and grave, one does not find that you appropriate for it, because you cannot heal from that ulcer nor have seen another, nor has it been overcome by that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is as has been allocated, thus we have said, that you precede and lay aside the patient and purge of black cholera some experienced doctors, and then recognize that, if it is an obvious and manifest repetition.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient in preparation for the operation, and then prohibit in the tract uncials that come to that; and then concave all parts of the code in a good perexcavation until nothing remains of the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that leakage, and express the places, and clear out the large blood totally by your hand or with an instrument, which is at your disposal among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps if you have caused a counter-flow of large blood into the vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood ceases, and then take care of it with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter five.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have recommended, in the division, of the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, of the treatment of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of altitudes alone, and it does not approach with iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hyposarca, because that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of dropsy tympanites with medicines and do not combine your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already become debilitated, or is in another malady, another dropsy, thus as it is in the entire body or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Perhaps if you often see the patient with exuberant vertu, and in it there is no other malady except dropsy only, and not an infant nor old, then the manner of the operation on it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and minister to him the extreme of the belly with his own hand, by bringing water to the party below the navel, and then take spatum spinos according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is of two sharp points long, of sharp extremity thus as spatum; perhaps meanwhile it is in some brief smallness little by little, so that in the operation on it does not pass into the intestine, and that leads to it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from part of the intestines, because then it happens that you are in the section alone with the navel for the quantity of three digits to the parties below, on the right side of the belly above the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Perhaps if the generation of dropsy is due to malady of the liver, then your section is on the left side of the navel for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section is on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not find that your section is above the rib on which you want to place the patient so that the superfluities do not flow to that free location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate with the instrument the entire code, and then enter into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatum between the code and the siphac, and you excavate it; and if the quantity of an ounce or around.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the siphac until the spatum reaches the desired location, and it is the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and enter an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or gold, on which in the lower part of it there is a small tract, and on its sides there are three tracts: two of one side and one of the other side; and the extremity of it is inscribed according to the manner of feathers, thus as often:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the upper extremity of it there is a hook, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends over the instrument, and evacuates the water at the same time in the same quantity, because if you evacuate from that same hour that does not find in the hour, strong death to the patient by resolution of the animal spirit, or it approaches the fifth crisis that is near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Perhaps evacuate from that according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what the dispositions of the patient's vertu of the pulses of it and its goodness signify to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because it is retained by the code that retains the tract that is on the siphac of which I recommended to you that you perforate it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then place the instrument on the other day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and make them drink for several days with fear, and beware of error lest you don't remove the water slowly.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps you fear the patient, and let out a large quantity of water, then cure that one who is buried in hot sand, and move him to a bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and cure that one with drying medications until he is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and mix it with the figs to extract the water, according to what you have recounted in that which has been previously written.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 54.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the cure of children whose urine passages are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some born-from-the-womb of some children are from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or is strait or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, one should hasten to make a perforation of the womb as soon as it is born, with a very subtle spatula according to this form.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the strait a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you will pass for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when one wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not leave this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Perhaps that one whose strait is strait should be medicated with a lead key, as we have said, for many days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Perhaps those in whom the strait is not in its place, are led astray, which causes them to be among those who are born and whose strait is far from the end of the head of the bladder, so that they cannot urinate to the divided parts, until they elevate the bladder with their hand to the parts above; and it is not according to generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a great malady.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient is placed on his back, and then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand in a vehement extraction, and insert the head of the bladder at the place of the perineum with a sharp spatula, as if it were an insertion of a feather, or you do not touch any part, so that the mien of the vein seems like the head of the bladder and the strait falls into its proper place according to what is suitable.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times it happens thus; and pause at the moment when you are about to cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the ulceration that occurs in the perineum at the head of the bladder and of corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the perineum to the head of the bladder.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many born-from-the-womb occur with this ulceration in the bladder and it is a great emission of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it is suitable that you suspend with a subtle hook and cut off that until it is totally removed; and then pause on the underlying skin submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then, cure the patient with daily dressing until he is healthy.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ulceration is malignant, of bad color, then it is suitable that you administer cautery at the insertion of it and the root of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Perhaps if the ulceration is in the perineum of the head of the bladder of the uncircumcised, and one part of the ulceration is deep in the perineum and the other part is outside, then it is suitable that you remove the ulceration which is deep from the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer one, because when you cure the inner one, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also it happens in the genitals and in the black and corroded perineum, therefore it is suitable that you conquer all that which has been denigrated and that which wants to corrupt or that which is corrupted; and then apply a line upon that with good milk, which is contaminated with flour of scorched millet and of bitter roots and crivellations.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure it with the other cure until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Perhaps if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because juvenile cautery is at two disposed moments, thus it is a flow of blood and at the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the bladder is corroded and is destroyed entirely at that hour, then it is suitable that you introduce into the meat of the perineum a lead cannula so that the patient urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the perineum to the head of the bladder (and this adhesion does not occur except in that one whose perineum is thus, and upon which no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess) it is suitable that you excoriate with an obtuse spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the bladder is delivered from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to discern those exquisite things, then be aware that you should excavate around some cause of the head of the bladder and of the prepuce, and thus it is because the prepuce is subtle, but it is perforated by its subtlety frequently.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the prepuce from the head of the bladder with a subtle instrument, which has already been mulched in the cold water to prevent it from adhering to another place.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be cured by a fixed stipetic treatment inside so that it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 47.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the cure of those things that occur to those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuity and thus with the other plagues: but rather it is of our operation and our will, and those of that are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and way, lest they lose their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in some of their free laws, because they did not use them in their laws, and it is only because they had acquired it through experience, which causes them to have discovered the majority part of the artifices and barbarities using circumcision and purification with a new and tortuous method; and they used to lament with a faithful and insidious unguent.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And thus they have prohibited all these methods and did not discover a better purification with forceps, with a faithful unguent that in purification with the nail, because many times it escapes downwards, because the code of the prepuce has two tunics, and one removes the tunic underneath, and thus it is forced to another incision and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in purification which is done by alphabetic, and is digital, which the Sabatiers use, it is not safe to incise the extremity of the virile member, because thus it enters into its tract.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, thus it obstructs iron and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the code of the child is brief by nature, and many times it becomes so accustomed in this manner that there is no need for purification, and thus I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But about the purification that is done with forceps and faithful unguents, goodness, experience has taught me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, for which the acuteness that is downwards is thus like the acuteness that is underneath; and so as you press your hand so proportionally on both sides, and incise thus according to a comparison in one time; and it is done with compression of the faithful figure containing the code of the bladder of the entire part, in which there can be no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you should not do otherwise than to place the faithful in its bladder only so long, and that you leave it there until another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do that in order to rejoice in all that manner which is at your possible ability to receive its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make that stay between your hands prepared and established, and do not be careless; and hide the forceps in your hand or underneath the towel, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the bladder of it and blow on the code, and pull that out so that the head of the bladder is exposed, and then purify that from what is aggregated in it of filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then bind the place signed with faithful double, and then tie underneath that one little finger according to the faithful, and then you have said to put the finger underneath the place of the faithful in good retention, and incise between two faithfulls.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the code slowly and extract the head of the bladder; and then let the blood flow little by little, because it is better; and pause powder downwards and on the powder pause drap in which there is spread a mixture of oil from a certain container, and let that sit overnight until another day; and heal that with a cure until it is sanctified.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for purification, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some of the extremities are not-taloned and others are taloned, so that they do not obstruct the branch of the nail, and it is the length of the two acutenesses thus like the length of two manual grasping extremities.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is because thus it escapes the entire internal code, or part of it deviates from the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, be aware that you should extend it at your hour with your nail during the postulation of the place and that you incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed, and meanwhile it has inflated underneath the postulated bladder, then you let that out so that the postulated aposteme is calmed, and excavate that with facilitation, and incise that according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Beware of the head of the vein, for it will not reach that water.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so cure that water which the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is situated on the back of the measure, and you have placed it under the parts above, that water does not reach it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And greater cure that water which we have said enters so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by stone or congealed blood, or by poultice or by flesh, and similarly to those things that we have said about the manners of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and there is retention of it by a stone which already is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over the sieve-shaped denudations.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the feet of that person on the sieve-shaped seat and extend the sieve-shaped belly of the part above the seat, and the patient should stretch out as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is constricted for expulsion of the stone to the back parts, so that the urine is absolute.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the water that we have said is vehemently made the cause upon the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It is of silver and subtly curved conquering, thus like a canal of penance of subtle Ausonian subtlety in a ray long as a palm and a half, to which the cane is subtle at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of injection of urine for this is that you take the doubled thread and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good ligation; and you insert the extremities of the thread into the part below the syringe, and you push them with the forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, more you introduce it into the canal with vehemence. And then you tie the syringe with a bandage and album of Huou.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on a chair, and embrace the bladder with it and the vein with olive oil and agarics.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe to facilitate its entry into the root of the vein; and then double the vein above at the part of the umbilical; and then fill the syringe with that; and then fill it so that it reaches the bladder, and this cures the patient of the void cause, and it is not done in this order, but rather the meat in which it goes to tortuousness.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the thread into the wool little by little, because the urine dries the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract it and do for the cure of urine, and use a syringe, do not stop doing that until the bladder is evacuated and the patient obtains great alleviation.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of cleansing of the veins with a clamp and similar instruments which are suitable for that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or aposteme in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is obstructed by poultice, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is necessary to make an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but in the extremity of it is a hole, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three channels: two on one side, thus many times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is water that is impelled, and it is according to the quantity that oppiles that, it is added, until when some cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what makes the clampcedra in which there is phicated naphta in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Then when you want to draw humidities from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw with that water which is impelled above the parts, because the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the vein according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then fill the humidity with that water which fills it, because this humidity reaches the bladder at once, and the patient feels that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the subtle crystallizer in which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is above and is similar to a small feather, and below the cane is divided into threads.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a doubled thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the crystal extremity into the scrotum.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then stretch your hand over the bladder with humidity, as the structure descends into it, so that the patient's humidity has already penetrated the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you are not present with the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that entire circumference; and then insert a strong thread through those channels, so that they are well-revolving; and then add the circle as it is also added to the bladder, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidity, and other and ague.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that to the instrument and do it so that it has been done as in the bladder, and express with your hand inside so that the humidity penetrates into the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	About the extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of the species of stone and cure of them with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone on which one operates with a hand, and surgical removal.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is stuck in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now narrate that in a clear and brief exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels his groin, and many times pen, and then it is prepared; and at that time the flow is open, and the colon is emptied of those matters.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is rare to see the healing of children with that condition until they have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in old people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is easier because it is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with crystal which extracts all the filth that is in the sick intestines; because that filth sometimes prohibits the eviction of the stone, and its inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then be near the patient with your feet and be steady and hold him strongly so that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder, or jumps out from its place sometimes with many efforts.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that circle between your hands prepared, and his hands are placed below, so that the bladder is entirely inclined towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then seek all of that and remove it entirely from there.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then you will quickly operate on it with surgical removal.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch the entire thing from below, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil the mentioned place with your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the mentioned finger if he is a young adult, and insert it into the anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And remove the stone until it is below the mentioned finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gently guide it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that with your finger, and expel it to the outer parts before it reaches the place of surgical removal.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend his right hand to the outer parts above, and with his other hand hold back the cord that is below the genitals, in preparation for the place of surgical removal.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatula beneath the incision of which this is the form.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and separate the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but beside the left thigh; and let the surgical removal be on that stone and the finger is in the anus, and let it be a transverse surgical removal, so that the surgical removal from above is wide and straight according to the quantity that I need to remove from the stone as much as possible, and no more, because for sure you will compress the finger which is in the anus with the stone, and it is forgotten, its difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you know that some stones have an angle and edges, because their removal is made difficult by that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that water it is like a bean, and it is round, and its removal is made easier.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if it is that one with angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forgotten, then it is necessary that you operate on that, or that you hold it with your gestures decently, the extremity of which is like a file on which you hold onto the stone, and do not let it escape; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot stand on that, then amplify the traction a little, and if you see a flow of blood, remove it with a strong vinegar solution.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you insert your hand into the opening of the bladder, and insert it inside; and then insert a small instrument as well; and it seems that if there are many stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance is that you insert it into a big section, because it hurts the patient for two reasons: either it kills or it prevents the continuous flow of urine, which is why the place is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer expulsion of it from the inside so that it is forgotten, or ingeniously in the fracture of its arm with forceps to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And put a dressing on that wound infused with oil and wine, or with rose oil and fresh water, so that the postrema (abscess) may be calmed.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then reposition the patient on their back, and do not disturb the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been disturbed, bathe the area with water and much oil, and then take care of it with continuous daily treatments and continuous medications until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound there is an abscess that causes corrosion, and it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the obstruction of the blood in the urine), then insert a tube into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will provoke the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with wine, water, and salt, and apply opposition to all species, with that which is convenient for the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And take care in all hours of the entire cure that you read and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and it is in the meat of the bladder, and it is fixed in it, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then cure it with that which you have recommended beforehand, because many times they pervert the section, and this accusation is made of section; and already you have experienced this, and it is that you take a perforator of iron like a file, of which this is the form.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, sharp, fixed in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a file, and tie it to the bladder below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating with facilitation until the perforator reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you perform the perforation of it until you make that from the other part penetrate; because the urine is then absolute.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then put your hand on that which is remaining of the stone from the partition before the bladder, because it is triangulated, and it is forgotten in the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure does not appear to you due to some cause that prohibits it, then tie a file below the stone, and another file above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then enclose the stone in that bladder between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the bandage and cleanse the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to bandage with a file below the stone, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage above, because when the file is removed, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to you when you lift the file above, that you elevate the cord to the upper parts, or return to give completion to the tube, and close the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 16.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see a stone in some of those, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman's bladder is very narrow.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you do not find a woman who is wise enough to describe the measurement of the meter when it is cast, or it is among women who have married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is because you do not find a woman who knows this art, mainly the operation with her hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the section on stone in women is far from the place of the stone, because it induces a profound section, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to provoke you to this water, then take care that you receive a moderate scientific bath, and few are accustomed.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that water, then seek a subtle and refined scientific treatment, or present a wise and experienced midwife in the art of women's feet, or a woman who in this art has divided the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that present, and command her to do all that you will order, from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; which cause is that they verify if the woman is virgin, then take care that you put the urine in a container and examine the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you obtain that, remove it from the urine, and then command her to inject above that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert the urine into the cavity of the womb and examine the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and grasps it with good comprehension.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you obtain that, then take care that gradually you remove it from the orifice of the bladder to the divided parts below as much as possible with your virtue entering into that channel until you reach the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then inject above that application of the marrow of the cavity to the root of the thigh of whatever part is paralyzed and place the stone in that area, and the urine of it will not be retained by the stone, removed from it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section is few at the beginning; and then insert the ray above that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know that the stone will be extracted from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the species of stones are many: some of them are few and large, and leon and aspran, and long and round, and have roots.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you know how many species are of it for the water that you signify above what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place of the vitriolic trissat and hold it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make that you prepare yourself with the instruments which are necessary for the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is injured, then stop powdering on the spot and strengthen those pulvils and descending structure, and do not iterate that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because very soon the womb will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then when the sharpness of the blood is calmed, then apply cooling journeys, and the spot will be purified, then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia and rupture.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia rupture is not but an aggregation of humidity in the white cavity which is below the code of the genitals containing the humors, and it is named cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some digested things are in the proper panniculus which prepares nature in the part of the humors, until it is known that already there is another humor; and it is the code of the genital between the white cavity which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitals, because at that time it is founded on this matter, and some veins affect by percussion made above the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and filthy, or it is whitish, and that is what is more.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs for which it is known on this aggregation of water are these: because if it is in the white cavity which we have said, then the apostema is red and declining a little in longitude thus like the figure of a humor, and appears the genital, because the humidity contains all that part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in its own panniculus, then the apostema is red in the part of the humor and thus one estimates that it is another humor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the code of the genitals and the white cavity, then it falls below the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And as you want the cognition of the color of the humidity, then you will spread the color of the humidity in the apostema amidst the Cartesian form of which the shape is preceded; and according to what is seen in the vestige of the intestines, judge that it is deduced from that.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the cure of the iron wound, then take care that you command the patient to be phlebotomized if it is possible for you, and sometimes touch the side of the patient.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then place a poultice on the back above some cause a little higher up, and pause until the worst pain subsides.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place your seat on the left side of them, and command the servant to follow on their right, which extends its rod about two hand lengths from the knee joint to the division of the miraculous belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and separate the knee joint from my usual place for the entire length of the thigh to the inner thigh.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make a section according to the correct alignment of the distant line that governs the skin of the knee joint, until it reaches the white cartilage comprehending.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure it; and your scraping is the one which that scrapes for the part of the joint that is suspended in the hollow and subtly examined in the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the white cartilage full of water with a broad perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with an incision, and extend the cartilage to the upper parts; and do not touch the knee joint comprehending, and injure the cartilage in that manner which is as much as possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And injure it in its entirety or in pieces, and subtly enlarge the wide back, for if you do not precisely examine the injury of them, it is not done securely so that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the hollow of that defect of its knee joint is in the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cartilage, return inside, and then adjust the two lips of the knee joint with a suture, and then cure it thus like the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the hollow corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you remove the veins which are above the suspensors, and extract the hollow, and then cure it in the way that we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is gathered in two parts together, then you know that two are the hernias; therefore injure that part according to what you have done on the other alignment; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you purify the blood, and enter into the clear sections submerged in oil or in rose oil; and pause before another section which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over both knees and the miraculous belly; and pause above double drapery and pulvils, and tie them above with a ligament according to this form.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two drapery and fill the carmenated wool according to this resemblance; and make the extremities with which it is premised of cotton or humid wool, and add structure in the breech of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes from the back up to the two, and the second takes from the part of the thigh, and two extremities above two thighs below and two other extremities above two angles, and all the structure is adjusted in the breech of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some veiled hernias are artificially medicated with a cautery in place of the section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutting cautery and injure on the knee joint of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white cartilage containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled in a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce the cartilage, and ignite until all humidity is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cartilage with an incision, and scrape with an incision, and scrape with a subtle ignited cautery; and injure that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself from the hollow that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more salvageable and more distant from blood flow, and better than an operation on the section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you find contradiction or apostema in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then it is necessary that you cure what contradicts you for that, with a suitable cure which converges to them according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is poor, and does not expect the second operation due to its horribility, then administer perforation according to what you have recommended for that; and it is when it is certified by you, for that which we have said about the signs, that this hernia is aqueous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is necessary that you place the patient on some elevated bed, then pierce the apostema in the lower part of them with a wide spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make a broad perception until all the water is drained out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then pause on the short place and lift that and let it flow, so that the current of the water flows.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then heal the wound from within so that the plague is healthy.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Perhaps it is contrary to the flow of water at that hour you perforate it: and this is not done except because the white bandage in the orifice of the wound makes a contrariety and prohibits the emission of water, then it is necessary that you put on the wound a pain or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropics, the form of which is preceded; or adjust on the opposite side of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and it is helped by a proper six months or in those surroundings; and when it is aggregated, then it should be perforated according to that same method, because the patient will pass the six days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the section about this hernia, there is great fear of losing it permanently in the major dispositions; because to me it seems the dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation on that one and the species of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: or for acute sharp inflammation, which is poured into the genitals, or for percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And therefore it is a putrid abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel to the touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some abscesses are made for swelling of the arteries, and for inflammation of those as well which has already been perceived, or for inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Perhaps it is for inflammation of arteries that is recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when it compresses them in the tight tissues; and it does not seem that it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	Perhaps what is done for inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause, but rather by compression in the tissues.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species a section was made and on the other carnal parts; and it is that you cut the code of the genitals, and then stop at the joint above, and extract that from the white ciphac, and remove the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and cut the suspensors so that you remove all the parts of the joints.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the joint is already consolidated in those carnal parts, then it seems that you should extract the joint and cut it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion within some cause of the ciphac, or between what is between the veins, then it seems that you should remove all that adhesion and cut it for a rounded incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Perhaps it is the birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it seems that you should cut all that which is of it, and extract the joint as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin ointment and rose oil; and then heal that with another cure within so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of hernia that is of wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Wind is an abscess enveloped by some envelopment similar to a broth with mollification of the testicles, and it is done with difficult movement exercise and ambulation on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness it is by fear for that which is preceded by memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I think that I should describe operation on that one according to what the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to seat the patient on a raised chair; and then apply the suspensors of the testicles to the lower parts; and then cut the code of the genitals in the tight tissues among the veins which are probable at the verge; and hold those other ministers that you, and extend them with vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then cut into the spatium widely through a transverse section in the right of the veins within so that the discovered veins are opened.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excavate all the parts as you have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those a needle which is double-fil, and lift that in the first of the places where you find wind, and lift that other vein in the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut into those in the middle place for a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with a cure of the other wounds in which you want to be healthy and are generated by so that the veins fall, which nourish one of the two genitals, because it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If the veins are blocked in all the vessels, then it is necessary to extract or remove the blockages from them, so that they can receive all their nourishment for the growth of the vessels, and they are strengthened, or so that there is no hindrance in those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that occurs when the diaphragm extends over the belly, on the part of the angles of the miraculous cavity of the belly, so that the intestines from that rupture move towards those intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of the excretion of it, and it is caused by these two special motives for many causes: either by percussion, or by falls, or by shouting, or by lifting some heavy object, or by similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it gradually increases over a long period of time, and does not suddenly occur, and it is a gathering of fluid between the chest and the belly, so that the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to a rupture of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it suddenly causes vehement pain; and it is a gathering of diverse apparent symptoms below the navel, which is due to inflammation of the intestine, and this is why it hurts in the parts above the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestines are protruding out of the belly like a finger, and this is called intestinal hernia umbilical.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made worse by vomiting, and sometimes the intestine breaks in the belly, and here it is retained, and this is why there is great suffering of the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and worsens when it is premature.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of these species of this disease iron is used, because it is necessary to remove the obstruction from that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of operating on this is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity through the natural passage of its conquest, if it obeys the usual return, and then place your hand over the area between the thighs, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stop the navel which is the navel of the vessels at the bottom, and you insert the navel of the vessels totally for the length; and then fix two lips of the ulcerous section together according to how they are indicated to close the ulcer in those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the ulcer is according to the quantity that you think it is possible that from that the hole may be protruding out.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then you excavate that part which is below the navel of the vessels, until it is discovered the white and hard diaphragm from any part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you introduce the finger into that place where it is the vessel, in which it is between the white diaphragm, which is below the navel of the hole, and between the diaphragm above, and absolve from that adhesion which is in the part behind the hole.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then you hold the hand at the navel of the vessels in front, and also extend the white diaphragm with your left hand, and raise the hole to the diaphragm at the part of the ulcer; and command the servant to extend the hole downwards and dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white and hard diaphragm.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause of it, then you will fill that into the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle in which there are four thick threads of ten threads, and introduce it through the back of the diaphragm, which is below the navel of the vessels, which is the ulcer; and then you insert the extremities that emerge from the thread until they are four threads, and then you compose some of them over a certain figure in the manner of a cross; and you tie it to the diaphragm of which we have spoken, that is below the navel of the vessels, with strong ligament of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then you envelop the extremities of the threads and tie them with strong ligament until some of the vessels that do not nourish those cannot transmit any cause, so that from here on, there is no gathering of fluid.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another time ligament according to the first ligament, three fingers from it; and then these two ligaments are released from the diaphragm which is below the navel of the vessels, according to the greatness of the finger, and you insert all the remaining part in a round shape, and remove it from the hole.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then you insert in the part below the navel of the vessels for the ulcer of which it cures and heals, thus as we have recommended in that which we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then you administer the submerged oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the ligament which we have recommended (and sometimes the white diaphragm is cauterized, which we have said, and then the intestine of the flux of blood, because many times it causes those) and release the ligament until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the treatment of it is delayed, then warm water should be poured over, and stop on that inside which falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with another cure of the wounds within so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of windy hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been hardened under the treatment of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first doctors said that it was done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is in you; which is to place your fingers near the section over that part of yours that has been facilitated by it; and then cut in a suitable place around the abscess, so that the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound according to what we have said, so that it may be cured.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the disruption that occurs in the ankle joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some swollen veins break rupture in the ankle joints thus as we have said, and empty the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not show any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged in this, an adjusted fissure is made in the groin area so that the intestine descends into the groin; and it happens for the extension of the groin which is in the ankle joints thus as we have said, which causes the groin to be extended, and then it becomes soft and the place becomes infected and empties.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery thus as it was preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some swollen veins are cured with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their two legs, and then cut the place of the rupture of the abscesses empties in section according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white groin area that is above the knee, so that it may be discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the stick and stop it on the prominent place of the groin area, and press it to the navel.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then kiss the two prominent places above the extremity of the stick of the groin area, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the stick, and do not insert into the groin at all, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause thus as you will know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then heal that with the treatment of wounds, and as it inserts into the veins, purify it and restore the wound so that it may be consolidated; because the groin is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is more suitable for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	About the softening of the knee of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many swollen veins in the knee of the testicles in some men are softened thus because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is necessary to observe it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for him who is engaged in the treatment of it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert the entire knee which is softened above the natural knee; and then adjust both lips with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, then in the beginning, remove the excess of the softened knee with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the stitches; and then heal by healing of the other wounds so that it may be healthy and the veins fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	About castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration in our law is forbidden, but I was led to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, of which one is so that it may be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in that, who knows the treatment of it and happens; and the other reason is that we many times have need of castration of other beasts for our young ones, thus as of mules, and of oxen, and of pigs, and similar to those beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by making a section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	Moreover, in that which is done by attrition, the way of operating is that we make the beast drink warm water so that its genitals become softened and loosened and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear to touch anymore.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Moreover, in castration done by making a section and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the knee of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspenders, and insert over each hole in one section so that two holes proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then insert those poultices that you will have extracted from the corrupted humor.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not place them on the area of the affected hip, but rather the subtle ciphal which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And in this manner of cauterization it is better which is done for attraction, because strong attraction draws out some cause of the testicles, so that the beast desires coition.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then heal the wound from within so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 20.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of Hermaphrodosia.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodosia in men is of two kinds: one is when it appears that the space in the channel of the testicles is narrowed, in which case a figure like a woman's cunt appears.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some urines that come out from that corrupted urine which is in the channel of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women it is a species: and it is that the cunt of the woman on the perineum is also like two testicles of a man, almost entirely hidden and partitioned off as if by the perineum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two in men and one species in women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted carnals within so that it expels the impression of that, and then you will cure those with the cure of the other plagues.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men, from which urine comes out that is in the channel of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On sterility and prominent flesh caused by women's influences.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Sterility is adjusted according to natural causes within so that it is restrained and is made light by observation; and some urines are magnified in some women so much that they spread like in men and pervade into the coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you hold the superfluity of sterility with your hand or with a hook and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not push in the insertion, rather in the area of the root, so that there is no efflux of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then heal it with the cure of the plagues within so that it may be healthy.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	A born flesh is a flesh that grows in the horrifici of the matrix within so that it fills that, and it is said to be at the partitioned areas beforehand according to the likeness of a snake (and for this reason some first-called appellants called it "malautia caudada"); therefore it is necessary that we insert it thus as we insert sterility, and cure it within so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alratica.	On the cure of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the cunt of the woman is not perforated, or it is a small passage.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to the hernia that has preceded it, and that is done or by flesh not adjusted or by subtle ciphal or by specific.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is done or in the area of the matrix, or in its sides, or in the upper pus, or in the lower pus, and it prohibits coitus and impregnation and infantation, and therefore it prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is done by observation of the womb, if the obstruction is apparent, it is propagated; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the ties of the finger or with the ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to subtle ciphal, and it is propagated to the two labia, then you touch and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that which pauses over the two labial pulvils, and then pause with the fingers indicating from both hands to the most interior.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her extended legs spread apart, and then extend the two labia into force so that the subtle ciphal is ruptured and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take a lantern and anoint the fourth oil and pause that over the place, and shout at home on the day so that the place is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the ciphal is large and specific, then it is necessary that you insert that with a broad spatula or a fennel of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that with a hook, and insert it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And there are your medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds, like haematostasia, and dragon's blood, and others, adjusted in a book of Uhou.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide poultice of broad lead so that the plague is not consolidated lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold that for several days and administer lukewarm water of the third.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is cured with another cure of consolidation within so that it may be healthy.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some old writings agree in the native birth of other fleshes, and then it is necessary that you insert according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	More it happens that it is due to aposteme cancers, the aposteme cancer which is in the matrix does not create contrary heat in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 23.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and of tail and red botch that suddenly occur in the groin area of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated for the orifices of many veins that enter there, where the corrupted blood flows continuously; and how ancient hemorrhoids are and are made by them.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will tell you which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are in the womb of the matrix and do not appear to the sense, then in those cases there is no treatment at all.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	However those that are in the orifice of the matrix above which catch sense, those are the ones that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And I advise that you place the woman in a warm bath and then extract the piles with the forceps, or with a sharp hook, and insert them into the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those from which the flow of blood comes, one of the powdered medications that are specific for moderating, thus it seems to be similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak the sick feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a decoction of sumac and of scorches of millet-grass and of walnuts and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of barley and knead that with honey and wine, and make an emplaster with that on the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is abscessed, it is so; and if not, make adhere to two warm vents, and to the nipples with scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge it in juice of coliac or juice of angelica or juice of guarrievier with wine, and make adhere to the place; and then cure the place with an ointment until it is healthy.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	However the royal rule which is of sharp regard, I advise that you insert that which appears to you according to what I have said in the royal engagement.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 24.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of accidental hernia in the matrix.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of apostemes suddenly occur in the matrix, such as cancer and aposteme lapidem and ulcers and adherent and erpetromenous and fistulous hemorrhoids and ragueries and thyl and other apostemes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said about these evils and the species of those and their signs, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I advise that you read in this treatise on aposteme how the one that is in the matrix when it is of those apostemes that suddenly occur, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of that is made at all.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore I advise that you consider if the pain of the aposteme in the sick commencement is acute with percussion and flecm and fever, and sometimes it becomes worse and catches sense on that, then do not touch it at all, and cure that with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then I advise that you make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back and adjust her feet at the partition below the belly, and her thighs are expanded, and place her arms below her knees, and tie it with a ligament according to what is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife follows the straight path and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the matrix is opened, in the form of which you will see in those causes that will be treated then.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And I advise when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the womb of the matrix of the woman, and what of the instrument enters into the matrix is not more than the womb of the matrix and leads to the evil.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	However if the instrument is larger than the womb of the matrix, then I advise that you place powders on the texture of the womb of the matrix so that it prohibits the entrance of all instruments into the womb of the matrix.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And I advise that you pause the vertebral column that runs in the instrument of the straight path from above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebral column until it is opened into the orifice of the matrix.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And as it appears the excretion, and it is touched by the hand and it is smooth and soft, then I advise that you separate it from the head of the patient with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sania is evacuated, then I advise that you place in the plague a submerged meca in rose oil or green oil in which there is some stipulation; and place the calcium in the section in the womb of the matrix.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And stop beforehand the mother and on the entire surface of the mundified skin submerged in water, where evil humors are driven out.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be treated for two days with an ointment that brings the humor into harmony, so that it may be healthy within.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some vegetables are washed with the mother and the plague is thus Christened in water and honey, and then in the water where the evil humor of ire or long-lasting aristology is driven out, and then it returns to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the plague is deeply rooted in the affected mother, then it is necessary that you be prohibited from the cure of that iron, having no care for that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To instruct the midwives in what manner they should deliver babies well, so that they are medicated according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should recognize in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth through signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expressing herself with the parts below and desires to smell the air, and above this is rejoiced by what is above her, and hastens the emission of the baby, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the emission of it above the sixth cap, and the second one is either suspended or pendant from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you see these signs, then it is necessary that the belly of it be compressed so that the baby descends lightly, as if it were being pushed above the sixth cap, they push it to the second one, and it is freed from those superfluous abundances with good moderation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Moreover, that which is another part is not natural and not praiseworthy, because when the baby is emitted above its feet and the body of it is emitted before its head and its feet, and its mother's hand, or at its foot. or it is emitted with its head and its mother's hand, or at its belly, and forth it is converted above the sixth column, and resembling the non-praiseworthy figures of it.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she should guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you have shown the entire figure of those, and which engine is in those so that it may be signified by what and stands above what.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is emitted above the sixth cap by natural gravity, and that is vehement against the woman and makes her part difficult, and sees the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that seizure, or that the women hold it, and evaporates the conjunction of it with fenugrec cotyledon and olive humectant.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the measuring rod between the sixth fingers of the spatulum, small and closed in that the second one, or dry that with its own nail so that it corrodes what is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Moreover, if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be crusted with a poultice of ptilli and a poultice of fenugrec with cizami.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it to her, and crust it with a poultice, so that it is compressed and makes that stornudar with condition; and close its mouth and nostrils for an hour, because the fetus will be fully ejected soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are not fully ejected at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them little by little with facilitation.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Moreover, if it does not obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then conceal the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the more are not deeply turned and the fetus dies, then cut those and extract the remnants of the fetus or tie the corpse to its mother with a cloth and extract that with equality, because it will be fully ejected.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The emission of the embryo above the six feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is above the six feet, then it is necessary that you impel those upwards, and then convert the fetus little by little, and then engulf that, and then take one of its feet and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Moreover, when they are emitted into the thighs, then you command it to emerge, and make that extrusion with condition, because it will be fully ejected if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not fully ejected in what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little into its pause according to a natural figure, because it will then be lightly emitted.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited from all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of altea and dissolved gum, and percussion everything in the mortar for good percussion, and then bind it with the conjunction of the woman, at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cesarean section in tepid water, until you obtain the hypogastria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the separated parts of the body are numbed, then do the subtle fumigation of myrtle and pause that on the patient.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have done the fumigation for an hour, then seat yourself on a chair, and place that stool under him, and stop the mouth of him, and lift it up, and press the lower part of his belly with a gentle compression, because the flatulence will be thus forced out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine the feet on the diseased joints and their hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the feet are examined according to this form, then you gently insert your little fingers between their small hands; and place the woman standing above the joint of the column, and his feet hanging in the air, and those should be leaning on the mattress, and complete their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press gently on his belly little by little, and extract that which is beneath his feet from the aureliae (probably a type of bandage or wrapping) until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the flatulence does not come out, then take his feet and move them vehemently, and press gently on that which is above the hypochondria little by little until the feet can reach the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And insert your hands and gently move the feet little by little, and command the woman to exert herself until the flatulence is forced out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examine the foot carefully during one of his hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It is ingenious in the reduction of his hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her go there.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go, then place the mattress on the bed, and shake her thighs with a vehement concussion, and then administer gentle blows which you have prepared with poultices.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the inflammation has come, then seat yourself on a chair, and study the reduction of his hand, and place the feet according to their natural figure, and stop the woman and command him to compress himself until it is forced out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examine the feet on the expanded joints, his hands, and the surface of his feet are towards the back of his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	So that the midwife holds the hand of the foot and gently turns it little by little, and thus it is facilitated.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is thus and you have manipulated it, then pause on the joint of his foot which we had prepared with oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command him to massage little by little, and when you have done that, then seat yourself on a chair and command him to be inclined over the straight side, and command him to be compressed; and stop the woman with condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus is turned onto its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you have seen the horror of the mother according to this method, consider it, and then you inject the second finger into your nail until it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended above the face and neck of his, then you inject that of the emetic, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then you apply the feet to the inner parts until it pauses according to what is suitable, and send the woman to compress herself in some voided places, and it will be forced out with a gentle examination, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that many twins are born void, and some women have three or four, but that is strange and it's an effort to understand; but I know the causes are not natural, and do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, already it is that they are multiplied, a second time, and are separated by cipher, distinguishing those that enter the ligament in the umbilical cord of each of those; some voided places are forced out thus as one fetus for natural examination, and some voided places are examined without labor thus as we had prepared.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult cases of their deviating from the inflammation and arriving at what we had said about the unnatural figures, then you cure them thus as we had recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does to facilitate and subtlety, and delays it, and is ingenious according to the entire figure as it is prepared for the ingenuous amenity of health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed in the womb one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have already verified that a woman aborts at six, and another X has all forms, which causes a false measurement of the glorious savors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is covered in the science of the midwife because it is strong enough to reach that small similarity of that, and therefore stops at that which I cover.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the established practice, and you are still forced to use your own operation, then consider if the woman is of healthy virtue and not at risk of accidents for which there is great danger.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a soft mattress on her back, with her head inclined downwards and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the midwife should hold that part of the two parts or be tied to the mattress so that the body of the woman does not spread out during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you will humidify the mother's womb with ointments and with mucilage of marshmallow root and of fenugreek and of licorice.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife will anoint her hand with those ointments and mucilages, and then insert her hand into the womb to facilitate it, and then approach the place where the nails are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And in this convenient place: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to be turned onto its back, and then you fix the nails in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or in the beard, or in the armpit, or in the places proper of the ribs, or in the hypochondries.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Perhaps if the turning is towards its feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the nail with your right hand, and stop the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand to facilitate and fix the nail in some of those places which we have mentioned, until you reach the internal cavity.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then stop and fix in the application of another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its rectitude as much as possible.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus you will have completed the whole procedure, so that the extraction of it is alleviated as if it were done with ease, without any difficulty.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary that in this case what is between them, the extension should be mollified; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and revolve in that place which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the nails are permitted to enter the place where it was previously; and do it thus until the entire fetus is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	Perhaps if the hand is exhausted beforehand, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around it; and then extract that until everything is expelled, and insert it or in the joint of the hand or in the curve.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it is necessary to do the same with the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Perhaps if the head of the fetus is large, or it happens to contract in the extraction, or it is in the head of the water adjusted, then it is necessary that you insert between the fingers spatula-shaped instruments and break the head and extract the water, or that you use an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly it is done if the fetus is of large head by nature: and then it is necessary that you cut with an instrument, or that you take with the alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is extracted and contracted from the armpit, then it should be opened until the humidity which is in the chest is expelled.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Perhaps if it is not complicated, nor does it obstruct the extraction, then you will cut the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the retention of the abdomen is postulated or is in its hydropsy, then it is necessary that you perforate it until the humidity that is in it is cleared.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	Perhaps if the fetus is towards its feet, then its attraction is lighter and the direction of it to the mother's mouth is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Perhaps if it is contracted from the abdomen and chest, then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and that you open the abdomen and chest until what is in them flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Perhaps if the other members are exhausted and the head is turned, then the midwife inserts her left hand; perhaps if the mother's mouth is opened, then she inserts her hand into the pubic area, and approaches the head, and pulls it out with her fingers until it reaches the mother's mouth, and then inserts one nail, or two nails, and pulls it out with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted by postpartum caution, which happens to it, then it is necessary that it not be troubled about it; instead, it is necessary to administer an effusion of humid, greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Administer emplasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is on the side of the bed, then if possible, it should be elevated: and administer what we have said to do in the preceding foot.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then insert poultices, and extract.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be careful not to leave any underlying cause of the disease untreated.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of apostemes caused by bad humors.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman with a dead fetus in her womb, and then apply another pregnant woman's excrement over that focus, and then the dead fetus is cast out.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to you that a long time ago an abscess was on the diseased womb; and it swelled up inside until it burst out, and begin to evacuate quickly.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have been called to the cure of it, and you have medicated it for a long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you have paused over it because of certain causes of strong attraction, and taken out a bone from it, and passed some joints, and taken out another bone; and you have been too marvelous, as if there were no bones in the womb.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you have gathered that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So you have understood the plague, and extracted from it many bones, the woman existing in her womb with many thousand dispositions, and I have seen it in such a manner for a long time, corrected by removing a small piece of arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you do not find it strange, but rather that there is science and help in what the artificial hand does on the wrist for administration of the cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertebrae in which the matrix is swollen:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of straightener in which the books are bound, to which binding two vertebrae are given at both ends of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	You should empower this vertebra to be more subtle than the straightener, and make it of ebony or of wood from boys.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And its width is of each wood that has two inches and a margin of about two inches that has one inch, and its length is one palm and half; and in the middle place of the two woods there are two adjustments of that same wood which were already fixed, of which the length is the measure of one palm and a little more, and its width is about two inches, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the womb of the mother so that it is swollen with those when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that one, more subtle and more lightweight:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of wood from ebony or boys, according to the similarity of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	You should empower the extremity of it with two additions thus, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and its width is two inches.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb, then you make the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging, opening what is between its thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then you will have your hand on the instrument thus, making a grip according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the womb, until the midwife does it as you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertebrae which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impeller in which the fetus is impelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of amissiad in which the large head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like a forceps which grips at the extremity, thus many times, and some viguadas are made long thus as forceps according to this form, thus many times, on which it grips thus as a grip of rescue in which it is inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of small amissiad:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps which grips to close in which the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two extremities on which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when they are multiplied by the species of that and prepared by the artisans, it is made lighter for their operation and also made more suitable for the quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you do not work with those instruments as if they were yours, because the necessity of those is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	About the extraction of the afterbirth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage is retained due to inflammation, then you command the patient to retain their urine, and at that time make them take a strong drink, and hold your hand over their mouth and nostrils, and if it is necessary beforehand, because it exists.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And then, you take a cloth and pierce it in the covering of a tube and place it on that herb which is near the mother's mouth, thus with calamint and rough and anet and camomile and scicados arabic and cassia lignea and santal.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them being submerged in water in the cloth, and then place that on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then put a cane tube in the mother's mouth, and hold it until the vapor goes into the cavity of the womb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that strong drink, thus as we have said, and the second stage will be quickly evacuated.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If the Roman method does not succeed, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of other oils, and then insert it into the womb and scrub there the second stage, and when you have found it, take it out and extract it little by little. If it is stuck in the womb's cavity, then insert your hand again as we have recommended, and when you have found the second stage, extract it little by little so that the mother does not fall into vehement attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before, make sure that the right and left sides are lubricated to facilitate.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust it in the quantity of attraction, so that it will obey and evacuate from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's womb is constricted, we have not recommended the treatment with stiration and medication of the cloth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If it is not evacuated with all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue over that in iteration of abstraction, but rather take care that what has been expelled from the mother's womb lies in the space of the woman, and then crystallize it into an ointment and tetrapharmacon; for that will make it dissolve in a few days and will be evacuated.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is purged, it is of the elevated bad odor at the head, and in the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then take care that they are administered with sub-fumigations and conveniently adapted to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the Ancients have already experienced sub-fumigation with narcissus and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of the instrument is that which the woman is sub-fumigated with, regarding the retention of menses and of the afterbirth.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or of copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And it should be placed with the thin extremity in the womb and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold it until the sub-fumigation is consumed and then another one will follow.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the birth of an un-perforated infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many infants are born like that and their births are not perforated, which have a thin and obstructed passage.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then take care that the midwife should perforate with a thin instrument that passage; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and beware that you do not touch the ligament.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place it on that woolen cloth in wine and oil; and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is obstructed, then place a cane tube in the tube for many days, and wait until the infant will be able to expel.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And thus you will achieve obstruction of the birth by consolidation of plague or of abscess; then take care that this consolidation is incised, and then it should be cured with what we have said about the treatment and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of the fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part below are swollen and nodular, those which occur near the birth beforehand or in the space of one party.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodulation is ancient and corroded by the airy white humidity or subtle pyriduria, and some of these fistulas penetrate to the bottom.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating ones are known through what has been expelled from them by the exit and by ventilation; and some of them receive the bad humor of exit, and it is clear that they have been expelled from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas are implanted in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those penetrations into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And what is known as a penetrating fistula into the birth and not-penetrating, is that you put your finger thus endwise in the birth, and then insert a thin tentacle of iron or of copper in the fistula when it is not twisted.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	Mostly if in that is turbulence, then insert into that subtle probe of lead or horsehair under the tongue so that you feel the probe or the hair on the tender spot.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all and it does not proceed from any cause of indigestion or worms or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then abandon the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, then the sign of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it to such an extent that the place in medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe reaches inside there if it is not turbulent into the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that the patient has a purulent discharge at times; and that it does not benefit from that medication, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is troublesome and vain effort by doctors against which they are firm.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which does not penetrate and is not chronic, health is ferried with iron and it is hoped according to what you have recommended, and this is what has already been and proceeded.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between their own hands over the back of the chair and raises their legs towards them, their thighs being inclined towards their belly, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in the turbulent fistula, until you know the place where the probe penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels it around the neck, then uncover so that you insert the tender spot indicated in the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already penetrated through the skin that is discovered, or something that feels between the tender spot and the skin or flesh, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not struggle with it, because it is not in that health, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But emperor, I will describe some things that are healthy in some houses, bitter.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medication for which you hope for youthful benefit in it, is that you ignite subtle cauteries according to the size of the fistula, as has been preceded, and insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it penetrates around the neck; and then iterate that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted, fistulated meats are like a feather's down.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then heal that with calques enveloped in bandages until they can all be adjusted, and then heal that with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe goes in, and does not penetrate into the tender spot which is in the anus, and between that and the probe that is barely a space of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula closes over the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see that it is dried with the probe, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe is felt, and through the probe it is liberated and purged.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated meats which are assembled like a channel of feathers and do not remain with any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if it flows seven times that comes between you and your operation when you insert those meats, then the thousand that is and of the pus less grievous instrument is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because cautery with fire adjusts good two habits: so it is adjustment of those adjusted meats, and removal of the blood's excess moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then heal that with calques enveloped in bandages or in trussed causes until the place gets strength, and then heal the wound with hard flesh that engenders and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines are those that are stipulated and excessive; when then it is restored, it is already healed and does not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert the tender spot in the anus and investigate with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you feel the probe and between you and it is barely a space of skin or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation in that place except by way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you acquire the conquest of it so that it is possible for you to insert the fistula and the proposed cure; and do not proceed with more drying so that you do not incite the contained liquid, and that you ascend upon the patient's assent of the will; and then heal it with what we have said because it strengthens the health; or elongate that barely a space and remove that pus which dries it until towards the anus, as we have said, either with a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated meats which are in the drying towards the one who is percrustated; and then make an effort to restore all the wounds with drying, and if the pus above does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the affected part, and it will be less grievous for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And the fistula is finished according to this method: it is when you insert the thread into the fistula, and it is on the sides of the cul (anus) around the surface of the body at the codena (likely means "cod" or "coccyx", the bony structure at the base of the spine) and on the margin of the cul, then take the perforated extremity, which is also like a needle for preparing the hollows according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	you insert it into that vein enveloped by five veins or around those; and then you insert the thread into the fistula until it reaches the cavity of the hernia.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Perhaps it penetrates to the margin of the anus properly between the teeth, then you extract the vein from that tube also so that you insert the finger into the anus; and you extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and strain each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when it penetrates more into the flesh, strain until those fleshes are penetrated which are between the two extremities of the vein and fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then heal the wound until it is consolidated and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Perhaps the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you are prepared, but not so much on the forefinger, because it is not for you to do that so that it doesn't incise the ligament; and then make it enter until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spinal spatula is such that it is suited for the fistula: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not-acute, so that it does not incise what is not necessary, like sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	About the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two methods, because either they come out between the anus resembling a Carbuncle, or those are like a cluster of raspberries.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And some of them are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times and it is one, and they are many, and they are outside the anus, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Perhaps those that are outside the anus are according to the measurements of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood with continuous flux, and it is according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is between the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to exert themselves until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take them with your fingers or hold them with your nail, and then you cut them at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Perhaps if the nails do not hold them due to their humidity and softening of those, then take them with a rough cloth or with a knife or with a woolen thread, and extract them with the fingers, and then cut them and powder over them with certain hot powders, so that they are as in the place of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal them with another cure until they are cured.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the exit, then you anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is a little bitter ingredient, and wash it with that water that is in the anus and it obeys to the exit more easily when the patient exerts themselves.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	Perhaps if the hemorrhoids are in front of the anus, then the cause of them is easier, and it is that you take them with your finger, or that you take them with a nail, and cut them, and then heal them with what we have said until they are cured.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And he who makes an incision, should administer the suturing of them according to this method: take a thread enveloped and insert it into a needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids from the above-mentioned parts, and make it penetrate with the needle in the root of the other part, and enfold the two extremities of the thread around the above-mentioned part below the needle, and thus latitudinally; and strain the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then tie the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And make it all, and leave one of those and do not touch it, so that the superfleuity of the blood flows from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then pause on the anus, wrapped in olive oil or cerate; and pause that on the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it until it falls; and when it is fallen, heal them with an ointment or another cure until they are healthy.
De curacio de fistulas.	About the cures of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many fistulas are caused by excess or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are antiquated and do not hold in that medicine, then it is necessary to remove them with the point of the spatula or with your finger until they are made humid and held back from those ulcers above, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	When you have set aside those raging humors that violently enter and disturb the primary veins, and then take care to heal them so they are healthy.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	About the treatment of gout, it is a key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You will know that it is gout, because it is a key, and it is not so unless you notice the redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of garlic, and it is done throughout the whole body and mainly in the parts below the feet and fingers, and it ends for those who have this affliction.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it happens that the gout is situated in the circuit of the key, and it has taken hold with its claws or with a hook, and it has rooted itself in its reason; and then take care to heal it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the secondary pain that is located in the following chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More of a true aposteme is a small, rounded, blistered, rough prominence on the surface of the body, and many veins come together in the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment of it is that you extend and insert it, or that you stretch it with a file or a hair within so it falls out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already eradicated inverted and non-inverted with the instrument which you will direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More of a true anthill is a small, rough or blistered prominence on the surface of the body, which appears like a nut in the forearm, and when it touches that, it is felt like the bite of an ant, and it is done around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment of it is that you take a tube of peacock's feather or of vulture's feather, and it is strong, and place that over the anthill until it contains the circle of the tube in the parts of the body; and then revolve your hand around the tube so that you insert what is in the circuit of the anthill, and place that on the skin of the flesh, and eradicate the anthill from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do it with a tube of iron or of steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part below the tube is to be subtle, imperforated (so it does not pass through), enveloped in such a way that above it the grasp of it is released and the revolution of it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the anthill according to what has been said before in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter of cauterizing.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The form of the instruments that are administered to give crystallization.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some veins are crystallized with silver or gold or iron fondue or molten; and some veins are done with those small and large instruments according to those which are administered, because that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose intestines are fragile or delicate, the crystallizations of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small crystallization:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube of it below which is tied the bag is wide according to this manner; and it is at the distance where the bag is tied, thus sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the intestine, is imperforated (so it does not open) much like a lion, subtly; and on one side of its flank there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel is according to the greatness of the roots and thus a small one is bigger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And it is the bag in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin, and the root of it is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it is perforated for many channels thus as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the channels is large enough to hold the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those channels a strong file of crude iron which is of diverse files, or around them; and adjust the bag to it; and when it is placed in it, it is stretched on the head of the crystallizer between two distinct and strong constrictions, and then crystallize in each channel: More, the quality of crystallizing in that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which is heated according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient is resupinated on his back, and raises his legs up and places one body part over which there are holes or a window; and then anoint the extremity of the cauterizer with oil or album of water lily or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then insert that into the intestine to facilitate, and then the minister takes the bag and extracts it twice and seven times with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine all that is in the crystallizer; and then remove the crystallizer and the patient raises his legs up to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that out of the sediment, it holds as much as it can; and if it sleeps for an entire night, it is more direct in its juvenile stage.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you crystallize that solution in the afflicted areas of abdominal swelling and his symptoms, then you apply the cautery inward so that it may be healthy.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are bloody abscesses or postules on the back, then the crystallizer is subtle and refined, among the crystallizers that children are accustomed to being treated with.
De curacio de las plaguas.	About the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that which is convenient to the book, and you have thus said the treatment of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diversified according to what and how they are made, and according to the place on which they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why many wounds are made thus are from a blow of stone, or incision of a space or of a knife, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with a dart, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Meanwhile, the wounds that are on the parts of the body are thus as a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the abdomen, or the thighs, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And you are recommending the treatment of some wounds because it pauses that rationalization and rule about the other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you begin with simple head wounds, because the recollection of the compounds will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when a simple head wound occurs and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's from a blow of stone or similar, and you have already treated the coding so much alone and it's a great wound and you fear about that bad abscess having a cautious swelling, then you should quickly apply the cephalic fleubotomia, and don't delay; and extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there's no prohibitive cause for fleubotomia, especially if the blood is exhausted from the wound, which is few.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it's the fleubotomia of the contrary of the affected part; and beware of the bad abscess of replication and of veiled and thick veins.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Meanwhile, if from the minimization prohibited some cause, then it is diminished of the vein and does not approach neither flesh nor vein.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the wound, if it occurs with cautious abscess, where it infuses in oil of rose or in wine on which it is stippled.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Meanwhile, if it is certain of cautious abscess, then pause on the wound, if it is recently with healthy blood and the air has not changed that powder which you recommend to apply little by little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then pause on the external unguents until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Meanwhile, if the wound is great or is from incision of a space and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust those with suture according to what you recommend about the suture of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Meanwhile, if the wound is already discovered of bone and flesh, and it's not retained except for a small suspensor, then incise that and apply curative treatment to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the coding, and command the bad abscess to be purged of veins in which there is gruesomeness: capsules and forming cysts and similar to them, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the coding and it doesn't adhere to the bone, then you incise all that rottenness and remove it, and apply curative treatment to it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Meanwhile, if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which healthy blood may flow, and it's not abscessed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that unincised, then you incise that with a spatula, or ligate that; and if necessary, you provoke that what we have said does not conflict, then you cauterize until the blood is abscessed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; in this way you powder over those with that powder, because consolidated in that moment when the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the preparation of the powder is this: take oil of rose one part, of dragon's blood two parts, of burnt crust three non-extinct parts; let it be thoroughly trituated and crumbled, and of that let the wound be filled, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it is on that adhering surface, and let it be coagulated with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply strenghtening to that beneath with pustules and let it alone, and don't remove it while it is thus, because it's not abscessed, since it's not eradicated from the medicine until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some wounds make that sole scar, when there is no presence of rose and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And you do this same operation on the great wounds when it is convenient to pause over them and they are strengthened, and so recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not convenient to stay in the position of this powder, but rather cure those limbs that I have told you about, by placing them on the cushions of the bed or on the flour of the ordered arrangement and water and honey are entered within so that they get purified; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Perhaps you have fallen into a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract what you have done badly.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will teach you the cure for fractures of the head in that which is coming.
De las plaguas del col.	About the sores of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Perhaps the sore has fallen on the neck, then it is not in the difference of medication, and between the sore of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	Perhaps the nerve of the neck is constricted or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in the genus but rather to be avoided cure of that which makes vehement stipulation, thus as ziniar and zegi that it appears like vetriol and resembles their quartet no more than the nerves and contradicts that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not stop on the sore for any cause of total friability, because the substance of the nerves is friable and its continuation is in the brain, which is the worst of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is what is cured by gentle medicines, thus as it is caused by washing with warm water, any infusion of oil rose or not-rose, and thucia when it is washed with warm water and the other minor pains are diminished according to this manner, and they lose human ills.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	Perhaps the sore is great, then administer stitching, or sew up its lips, and then cure it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Perhaps the sore is deep or has fallen into the worst part of the body, then pierce it in the place where it is most precarious.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	Perhaps in the sore an artery is constricted and a flow of blood has been obtained, then separate or dry it, or bind it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke it to that.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps you have inserted the vertebrae of the throat or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the codena with stitching over the cane of the throat and do not touch that; afterwards equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and then strengthen it with a decent structure, and leave it for some days; and then cure it with ills in which there is stipulation and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	Perhaps the sore has formed an abscess in the bone, then pierce it, and then if there are fragments of bones, extract all those that you can from them; and what you cannot remove, leave it until the sore is purified, and let it be separated and the edge of the bone be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the sore is recent, then powder over that powder which I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	Perhaps in the sore there is made a fistula, then cure it with water of which the remembrance will come to you in the seventh chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	About the sores of the neck or similar ones which are made between the spine and are made with a splint or with a collar or with a lancet or with similar things.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of the lancet or of the collar, and sometimes of its depth, then consider perhaps that the sore has been visited when the patient was ill; then you will know that the sore is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the sore is recent with seven bloods, then you stop in it of the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and alleviates the patient, perhaps pause in it an attractive ill, and dissolve those two veins a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ill is not present to you, then pause in the orifice of the sore as much as possible so that it sucks what is of the humidity; and make that the patient sleeps on the sore so that it runs what is in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	Perhaps if the sore has passed three days or more and does not affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart or stricture of wings, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the sore is saved; and then cure it with calves and the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	Perhaps if the healing of it is excessive, and already all time has been overcome, then you will know that a fistula has been made; cure it therefore according to the seventh chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the sore is from constriction of a splint or collar, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure it with water that is preceded by stitching, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	Perhaps if it has formed an abscess in the bone, and then you constrict its edges, then twist the sore and gather to extract those edges, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	More if they are not separated, then read the entre that can be empowered by the plague, which their extraction from it is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other accidental afflictions in the other members, the juvenation in cure is the juvenation of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ailments of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the belly is great, or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great many evacuated or cut off intestines or nerves of the intestine, because it is a made introduction of theirs and the suture of theirs being more vehement and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And the small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and thus it is that the reduction of theirs is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introduction of theirs to their own place at once, because it becomes engrossed and it is made difficult by the instrument of it.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And thus the moderate disruption is better, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And it is known that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that concur in sutures of the other ailments of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures communicate with the other ailments, but especially they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each one's exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So it is said that when the ailment is small and some cause of the intestine is for that, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is come to inflammation through the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when it is thus, then you should scaldfy it in this way that you submerge a sponge hot with humid drap in warm water alone, or that you cook in water squinant, and cyperum, and spic, and embroques on that intestine within, until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some evacuated make it seen in which has stipulated, and it is better than warm water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you should humidify the intestine with water in which is cooked altaea and malvas, because for that it is alleviated the instrument of it with few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of it is excused from this cure, then you should divide the disruption with a small instrument in which are inserted emollients.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and there is no occupation to sectionalize necessarily and to fail.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, thus you see its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp-pointed stick, and the other part not-acute, and the subtle extremity, and it is not in the subtlety of a spatula, but rather it is obtuse by a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the ailment is amplified and it is outside the intestine, then you should that its reduction be according to the form of the natural, in its own proper place, if it is possible about that, because better is.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs thus that their head is higher; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you pause the head of it and the feet thus that the parts below are higher.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should pause your intention and consideration for a time in this way so that the part in which is the ailment is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer it in the great ailments and in the moderate ailments.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small ailments, pause that which is to your preparation, and thus make that the minister be among your most prepared, who has the total disruption at his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and thus discover from that to he who knows the suture of some cause to another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or count of needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the ailment; and thus release the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or you do not put faith in the two extremities of the code, at the two extremities of the ciphac that is below the code of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added the two extremities of the code and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And thus strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some evacuated from two parts at once, and thus add the two lips to the ailment for decent addition; and thus release the grossness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and thus tie it with faith as if it were the primary needle; and do not cease to do so if it is necessary among the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the ailment.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the fine needles are inserted between the grooved and subtle areas, because the fine needles subtly pierce the flesh; and the coarse ones have difficulty entering the codeina, and thus it is seen that the fine ones are in subtlety and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	It is not seen that the needle is fixed in both extremes of the codeina propounded against it, so that the flesh is not subtly pierced and that the wound closes before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they are not prolonged with a suture so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then the extremes of the needles are inserted so that they do not let the malaute deviate from its usual dormier; and poultices expanded with a whole part are placed over the suture, which hold the extremes of the needles; and thus it is seen that the wound has already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And in these species of suture with needles, it is customary to apply them conveniently in small wounds, because they have need of a suture with one needle or two around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is communal: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremes, of the codeina and two extremes of the ciphac, in one way, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped in subtlety and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremes, return the needle from that same part of which it began, so that the thread retracts and draws out the most subtle part of the wound, so that the suture is according to the suture with a drawstring in which the threads are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And stop between each suture the quantity of the grossness of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in this suture, I have often cured the wound that was inflicted on a man in his left belly, which had been wounded with a knife, and it was a disruption of the major wound of one palm, and it was situated around two palms of the intestine in the middle location, and it was a disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have often reduced that swelling that the intestine had been outside the wound for 23 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around that time, and I cured him and he is healthy; and then I saw him for many years, and it is converted into his own dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healthy; and by a miracle, it happened, because I did not cure him with an ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment nor any medicine was of use, but rather I placed a poultice on the wound for many days and nights, and I washed assiduously with honey water until he was healthy.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Moreover, I will describe two special species of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the codeina, and you insert the needle from the forepart to the hindpart.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates into the codeina and in that same place it is straightened according to rectitude and length of the whole body, and thus the extreme of the ciphac is where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the hindpart to the forepart in the other extreme of the finger.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And thus when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another way in the same extreme of the finger from the forepart to the hindpart; and thus the extreme of the ciphac is in this layer, and make the needle penetrate from the hindpart to the forepart in the other extreme.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate in that your penetration is made in which you make it penetrate into the ciphac in the extreme of the mirror, which is in the part of it within, until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then it begins from this same coast and sews that which is in the extreme of the ciphac in another layer, and extracts the needle from the codeina that penetrated, and then returns it to that codeina and thus the extreme of the ciphac is on the other side in this extreme of the mirror; and extracts it from the codeina that is part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make it one way and another, and make it one way then another way until you collect all that is fore according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you collect a suture of pellicies in which you collect the skins, thus that you collect the ciphac one way from the part of the extreme of the codeina, and that you leave another way until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Moreover, the second species of proper suture that Gualia says is of sermo, and it is recommended for him and by him, it is that you collect according to similarity in which you apply medicinal collections that collect, thus that they add all part to its comparable part conveniently by nature; and they apply the extreme of another to the extreme of the mirror to another extreme, and this is done according to what I recommend to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own discretion, and make it penetrate to the inner part of the foreskin, and let the two extremities of the scaphoid bone; then return the needle and make it penetrate from the foreskin to the inner part of the two extremities of the scaphoid bone.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then return those needles, and make them penetrate some inner parts of the foreskin into the outer part in two extremities of the mirror on the opposite side that is in the contrary latitude.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common ligature, and it is a suture of which I previously mentioned the remedy.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the serum of Wales
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And the dissected abdomen is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce them into these holes, and begin with the introduction of a needle from that which belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those which close the wounds together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when disruption is in a middle place of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than of other places of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medicine for plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which cause is because when you recently contracted the plague with bad blood, before the air altered that, and reduced the intestine and constricted it decently, then paused over that incarnative powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that dissected abdomen which holds the abscesses, so they are present within to make hard and dense flesh, and thus consolidate scaphoid bone and mirror; and then cure it in this way as is the cure of other plagues until it is healthy.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines, then pause over that at least, because it begins to take hold quickly, much better, and exchanges those two vegetables a day, thus as you and teach, until it is healthy, because you do not need another medicine in many dispositional ways when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the principal members, then place under the woolen cloth of tempered quality, or in rose oil, and pause it in the circle of places that are between the veins and joints.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the intestinal veins, because many vegetables have been given to you, then crystallize that in six stipatic black points, and majorly if the pus is generated in the intestine and makes a penetrating exit into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that which is of the large intestine is of purer blood, healthier than that which is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "gégenu" does not receive healing from plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and due to its magnitude, and due to the subtlety of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if that which proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your rectitude with which you reduce the intestines decently.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the space and already is green or black, then strengthen that with a thread over the place that is denigrated of it, so that healthy fluxes come, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then inscribe that which is another ligament, and pause two extremities of the thread pending from the part below the plague foro it, so that over you be alleviated the attraction of it from the falling of the fabric and emission of the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remedy for plagues when they settle in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption settles in the intestine and is petty, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for thus because you saw that which was plagued in the upper abdomen with percussion of the lance and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its governance and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you understand the cure of it already, that it was not confused in its healing, but rather you continue to subtily treat it until it is healthy and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you have seen that the place is already consolidated, then proceed over the patient who suffers from bad accidents in the upper abdomen; and do not undertake anything for that bad accident and remain in their many dispositional ways mangling and venting, and then enter into a bath and exercise themselves in their own words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already I have experimented with many experiments that when plague settles in the intestine, and is petty, then place it according to this manner: take granulated caps; and then adjust the two labial lips of the plague and pause a granule of those which has an open mouth over the two labial lips of the plague; thus when you take hold of them and strengthen their mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And you should pause another remedy for the first attack, and do not stop until you have made another remedy according to the quantity of all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And you should return that one and constrict the plague; and remove those annexed capsules from the intestine so that the intestine may be healthy; and do not aggravate the patient with unnecessary movement.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the intestine is lightly attached to the subtle fiber which is made from the intestine of annexed beasts, since it is more in a corner; and it is that you take the extremity of these fibers of the intestine, and it is not very decayed, and you attach the extremity of it to the fiber of the same, enveloped, and you insert that fiber into corners and constrict it to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of stitching with remedies is not based on anything but trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then there is no remedy but subtlety, and it is not a total healing of all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	About the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that all plague and aposteme when they become inflamed and old, it is an ulcer, and if not consolidated and healed for a long time and not abscessed, then, in whatever member it may be, it is universally called fistula and we call that abyss.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is a hardened, tough, white node, in which there is no pain and which is constricted thus as it is constricted by the pain of a bird's beak; and for this reason it is named a painful ulcer, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in an ulcer of moist humors, which heals slowly; and for this reason the moisture is abscessed in certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some of these moistened humors are thick, and they are few, and they are coarse, and they are subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already determined this in the division, then when you have diagnosed the plagues, that every ulcer that is not healed nor is it in naked flesh, is not due to anything but one of nine causes: either because of few sane humors in the body; or because of bad will; or because between the body and the lips there is hard, prohibiting the nativity of flesh; or because it is from a thick leg; or because that ulcer in itself is putrid and the matter that is transmitted to it is of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient for its cure; or when corruption sets in the region, and it is pestilential; or because of the property of the region, as in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of maladies is made, and healing of apostemes is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	You have already shown all those causes, and the signs of those and their cures with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is suitable that you know how to make a cure for fistula, which is done through surgical operation with hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you know that fistula affects all the members of the body; because among those are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the spinal vertebrae, or to some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and among those it is that which gives proximity to the principal member and resemblance.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore among those fistulas which are according to this manner are of the maladies of difficult healing, and do not receive a cure, and occupation with that is trouble and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is of the fistulas some depth of which does not penetrate to those places that I have said, and you hope and confide in its cure, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take a tent of iron or of steel, and if the fistula goes according to rectitude, and you acquire that with hand.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a subtle leaden probe, because lead in the elevation of the body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has very horrible things, it is not possible for you to signify anything about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then crystallize the horrible things through their horrible things, because the moisture for which you crystallize that goes away from the other horrible things and corrects them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And you should inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves, and it is the constricting of the long-distant fistula or propinquous, or it is a fistula in which there are many horrible things and this is about all your strength, in your entrance into the malady, in which you enter into the malady, and the invention of the pain away from your compression on the hand over the place, and resemblance of the signs and of the accidental causes to the aposteme.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have stood over all those causes in a fixed position, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider whether the apparent fistula is near or far from the joint, of nerve, of artery, of vein, or of one of the places which you have pointed out.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you touch the fistula according to what is said about its narration, and observe if it is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and if it was born in the origin of the flesh, or of the heel and of similar things, and cure that within so that it may be healthy.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Perhaps the fistula is of deep profundity, and it is according to rectitude, then you should insert that into the surrounding area as much as possible, and then Mondify all its corrupted flesh; and then administer some enveloped acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which has comprehended in iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that some of those sharp medicines enter so that the acute medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with those that generate healthy flesh within, so that it may be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Perhaps if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Perhaps the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to certify that, then you should inquire into it and touch it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member, thus as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you should root out that within so that the corruption is held completely; and then cure it with what encircles it within, so that it may be sanctified.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healthy and throws out the arm thus as it was doing, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again secondly and exquisitely the reason of it and the mundification of it with the last strong fortitude, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the deep profundity of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you should not try to generate anything there but only leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract it, then you should extract it with subtle forceps that are convenient for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you should exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and of those that do not leave any cause in your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Perhaps if you have made opposition to any cause of the humors, and in their insertion there is no fear nor error, then you should insert those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Perhaps if you have not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause over the plague that touches the plague there, and leaves it within so that it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the plague so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have inserted in your operation is constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone situated above the three olive oil, or submerged bone in Egyptian anguished vertebrae, because when they purify those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their separation, and of those attracted is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Perhaps it is a large bone thus as the bone of the chamber or of the thigh or similar to those, and what of it is corrupted is the face of it so alone, then root out that with resolution so alone in the end so that the darkness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the plague.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Perhaps what of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and totally insert into the place where the corruption has pervaded, and then cure it so that it may be consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what has been tried at home on his thigh so that you pause there and exemplify and adjust over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about thirty years, to whom pain occurred in his thigh, and from the affected parts it is clear that the matter is concerning the body within so that the matter has pervaded into the thigh, and it is matter of an abscess in a great abscess, and I do not find any extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I extended the time in that error of the doctors within so that the abscess was hidden, and I gathered the putrid matters, and its cure was paused until the thigh was fistulized, and it was done in the rotten origins which all had gotten purulence and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then I treated many doctors around for two years, and I did not find any knowledge in those arts except in the one which was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And behold the chest of that man and the materials that flow from it, those orifices for a large body; and already the body of that man was totally stabozited and the color of it was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then I will introduce the probe into one of those orifices and pass the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I will thoroughly examine all the orifices and try to penetrate to their origin in all parts of the chest.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I will dissect and incise over one of those orifices until I discover a part of the bone, and I will scrape out that corrupted matter, and it was already corroded and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupted a part of the chest until it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I will syringe out what was discovered by me and prepared from the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I will verify that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had extracted and syringed out, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I will pause the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I will iterate and uncover the bone again according to the primary discovery, and I will continue to scrape out corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will syringe out what appears to be that corruption, and then I will perform forcefully the cure of it and the restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered about the other side and did not cease to incise the small bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and that extract was from its marrow, and then I will restore it with medicines, and it is consolidated quickly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and sectioning of it except for the disposition of its fragility and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it hastens to total hours for superfluous evacuation of bad syncopes.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is healed entirely, and nothing is in the place of hard flesh; and it is made good the disposition of it in its own body and returned its virtue to it; and it is converted into its own dispositions and did not make any contrariness in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Moreover, if it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already extracted, then you will see that you must do this according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command it to extend itself into its own; and pause that ligament of wool which is thicker than the primary ligament; and then tie it over the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts beneath, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not lead the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause just below the bone decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to saw so that it does not cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is seen that the sawing is over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sentiment, and it forces the sawing of the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, then it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts totally; and then pause just below, and then saw that from the primary part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing is according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in its generation.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the thickness of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, I see that you inquire about the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you grasp it, and examine it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and in case it can be rectified for you, when it does not make any contrariness or nervousness.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what instruments are needed to incise these bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and greatness and smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; so that I see that you prepare all kinds of operations and convenient instruments for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation means to you about the kind of instrument which you need; when I am great study and long and knowledgeable of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of maladies, because then you have them for yourself, so that you can measure what is convenient for the instruments in all maladies.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you have formed in the end of this chapter the list of instruments that you will need, which are simple and which are prohibited, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw: (Note: It seems like the text is listing different types of instruments or tools, and this line is describing another type of saw)
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of a large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a radius:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this radius is according to the form of a star-shaped nail head, and its points are according to the form of the pointed stilfeggio ( stilfeggio likely means stilhetto or stiletto, a type of pointed instrument).
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable unless you confide in that instrument to scrub the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor among the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw decently made: it is made with an arc of its handle curved and the sharpness of its iron, and the member of its boys (possibly meaning "parts" or "components") are decently made.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small rasp resembling a file:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor that is used to cut into the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a radius, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a radius that is suitable for the ratio of those that are perforated into the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and of sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covered that all the causes we have said about rasps and incisors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	About incising extremities and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with cures of medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption becomes so great that it devours the member which does not perceive any cause, then it is necessary to incise that member until the bone where the corruption resides, so that the evil may pass away through death or malice, which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens to him, is that the member becomes black until it is understood that fire has already consumed it, or it is weakened near the blackness until the weakness reaches the bone inside that member and takes hold of the whole body; and thus you will know the incision of that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if it is a cause of corruption due to venomous percussion from certain causes, such as from a maritime scorpion or a viper or a rhutella and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you incise at the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it worsens, then you incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause or treatment is to quantity the virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly it happens with the foot when corruption worsens in the toes of the foot, then you incise that up to one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the skin of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Moreover if it spreads into the ankle, then you incise the leg up to the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the ankle, then there is no remedy except dismissal, and leaving the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you stretch one ligament at the part where you want to incise, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend one minister (assistant) with one ligament to the parts below, and extend another minister with a ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments in a spaced-out manner until all the flesh is discovered; and then it is incised or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to place a cloth of linen over all parts so that it does not touch the area there, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and cauterized with caution.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Moreover if there is a flow of blood when operating, then you cauterize the area carefully, or place above it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a clean dressing to the affected limb in a convenient way, and take care that the wound is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	You should recommend to him that he should avoid going out in the cold foot, this kind of accident which you have and recommended, which is quite common for the black bile in the cold foot to be assembled into combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corrupting accident occurs primarily in the cold foot inside, so that it tends to affect the whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for such pus as comes out of the limb with great vehemence, which attracts more pain and discomfort, and the incision is made on that foot inside the joint, and it heals by fire.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, that corrupting accident occurred in the hand of the mother of mine.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and I felt forced to report that superfluity above the hand of medicines, near the purification of his body; and it does not remove the superfluity, and begins to go into the other foot inside, until it begins in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the doctor told me to incise his hand, and you do not want to do that which appears above the repercussion of that superfluity, and more than anything fear the incision of his mortal hand, because the virtue of the patient was on the verge of collapse.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he despaired of me, he returned to his own land and it happened to me that the man prepared and incised his whole hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration except to be an aid regarding that which is spoken of in this illness, and that it may be significant for what is signified and according to which it is worked.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the care of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses occur in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is drained from the body, and one finds the place where it was, as if it were a vessel, and the cord that is above the abscess as a subtle drapery, and it does not reach the derriere corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption penetrates into a certain member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that one incises the entire cord thus as it is revolved, and especially when it is subtle and made into a drapery, and one makes sure that it does not adhere to the place for its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you fear that the cord will adhere and that the corruption has not been conquered by previous consequence, and in the cord it has passed from one side to the other, then you cure him with a clusters.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And that is what you consider about the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm which you have is of fetid odor, then you cleanse him with Egyptian medicine made of oil and wine and juniper, and receiving equal parts, and they are adjusted in a vessel, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine is roasted and penetrates to a specific place of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take of him what is necessary and dissolves the honey in water; and you cleanse him with that in the sinus, and strengthen his orifice, and leave the medicine in him for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that honey with precision; and do so for many days until the sinus is purified and the pus is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some vegetables are cleansed with water of ash, when you do not have this medicine present; and it is that you take the ash of vitex, and mix it with the water; and then strain that and cleanse him with it until you confirm that the sinus is thus cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not have tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of ash, then cleanse him with honey and water and a mixture of juniper, and cleanse him with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey that it purifies and cleanses, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is superfluity of stickiness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do that to some vegetables and you confirm that the sinus is already cleared, then cleanse him with water that makes the flesh grow in him.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take of dyaphonic unguent and dissolve it in oil of rose and wine stipated; or that you cleanse him with some medicines and other unguents which have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on unguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is strait in which the cannula of the cleansing cannot be received, then you amplify it little by little, and pause in the warm water wrapped in Egyptian unguent or basilicon unguent until it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	It seems that the text is describing a medical procedure. Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	"And if the orifice of that which flows through the arm is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lower place where it is in the pus, because when the arm is constricted at the joint's curvature, the flesh will be engendered in it."
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	"And if it is not possible for you to dry the joint from the surrounding pus, then you will prepare the member with preparation for which the arm flows more easily, according to your own judgment and without any retention of the cause of the arm."
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	"Take consolidative medicines that are applied conveniently to the joint, according to what you want to extend those onto the cloth of the limb."
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	"And the cloth should be of such great quantity that it makes contact with all the joint; and then insert the forked ends into the orifice of the joint, making a wide passage through which the orifice of the joint can flow, and extend over another cloth of the limbs according to the quantity of the passage, and place it over that for a long position of the orifice of the joint so that the arm's ease is alleviated and no great cloth remains except to apply some days a dressing."
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	"Moreover, that which is on the orifice of the joint, which remains in place for a whole hour, so that it becomes adjusted to the arm's own."
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	"And so that you know if that which flows from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested, or not digested."
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	"And thus you should consider the place of that joint, if the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	"And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is grafted onto the orifice of the joint already adheres, or it takes proper adhesion, then you may remove it on the third or fourth day, and when you remove the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the dressing."
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	"Moreover, if the joint takes a little space, then do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it will take place, because some homes are in those which generate slow flesh in those plague wounds, and of those which are done contrary to them."
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"And if the joint takes many days to digest an indigested arm, then you know that the joint does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the joint is delayed and is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus with a dyafinicon dressing, when it is in an adjusted superfluous addition of zeal."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	"And the last thing is that which is cured, it is that you take from the dyafinicon dressing and dissolve it in rose oil, and it is on the vojat vi antic equal in its substance, and you comfort with that, and use it."
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	"And now it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, dyafinicon dressing, but rather it is contained within so that it is gross, and use it; or take myrrh and aloen and grind everything into powder over the honey which is on the focus, and place it above the cloth and strengthen it above the joint; and place that above the honey which has been contained within so that it is gross, and powder above the cloth and strengthen it."
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	"And some vegetables are administered in the long aristology and root of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and farina of errors and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, grind those and powder above the honey which has been recommended; and use it."
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	"And if the joint is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the purulence of it, and now it has inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with a fistular cure, thus as has been said above."
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	"Of the cure of panniculus and worn-out nails and incised digits added to the section."
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	"Panniculus is an abscess which grows under the nail of the finger or toe, and it grows in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less precised, or it is cauterized with a hot abscess, or it is corrupted, and it throws out arm into corroding the root of the nail, and it corrupts all that, and it pervades its corruption to the bone within which it is in foul odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and its color is made dark."
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	"And so when you have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you incise all the superfluous flesh that remains from the nail and cauterize the plague properly, because cauterizing much is not beneficial thus."
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already begun to comprehend the flesh at the divided parts, and start to pierce and lance that, then it's clear that you should pause subtly beneath the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and impel it inwardly into that flesh to facilitate, and pause over what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines burning inward so that it may be totally removed; and then cure that which has been engorged so that it may be healthy.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it's clear that you should incise into the bone and extract it, because at no time is it healthy when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption have gone into the finger, then you incise into it in one of the nails according to what is prescribed for its remedy, and then cure it so that it may be healthy.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail has received a concussion or injury, and has received intense pain, then it's clear that you should apply flebotomy to the affected part, and then cut the nail with a spatula-like instrument above the transverse section below, and be careful that the cutting does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you aggravate the intense pain of the affected part, and cause an excessive growth of superfluous flesh at the site; and then cure that place so that it ceases to hurt.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But the adjusted finger, which is born in the hands of many men, is entirely fleshy, and entirely flesh in the bones, or entirely flesh in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the roots of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in the nodes of the fingers does not become bad, and this which is born in the joints is entirely swollen.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are fleshy growths, the cutting is easier, and it is that you should incise into their roots with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its amputation.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born on the fingers with the nodes, it's clear that you should incise at the beginning of the flesh to make a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those convenient saws suitable for that, and then cure it so that it may be healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation is that which accelerates the fingers between the worn-out joints or by birth of the man who has them thus, or for consolidation of plague or for combustion of fire, or for semblance; therefore it's clear that you should cut into that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between the flaps of the swollen veins in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them from each other, or pause between them with a thin layer of lead until it is consolidated as it should be.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation accelerates in the fingers on the palm, then you cut into that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of veins, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose, and they are grossly swollen with superfluous melancholic fluids which come from the members of the body, and the greatest incident of them is in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and porters.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it's clear that you should administer purification of the body from black bile in some worn-out veins with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the cure of their iron ferrum is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood should be attracted, and the other method is that the vein should be elevated and all of it should be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The cutting of it is according to this method: inject at the beginning of the leg with warm water until the thick blood is resolved, which is foul-smelling from the leg, and then strengthen the affected leg at the superior part of the thigh up to the knee, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood at the right time above the knee, and below, until the quantity that you want is extracted, and which tolerates the virtue of the affected part.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then leave it, and command him to abstain from the food that generates black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and there is no improvement in the affected part.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this method: you who raise the affected leg, if there are many pels in it, and then put it in a bath and inject the leg with warm water until it becomes enriched and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised with strong exercise, even if a bath is not present, until the member is scaled.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then you should section the vein in the right direction to cut into the loin or in the back of the patient's body, or in the lower part of their thigh.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then you should uncover the vein at an inch and scarify the entire vein within so that it appears to sensation, and it is from their perception that sometimes that rough decline turns to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then you remove from the vein at times that white discharge which seems like a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you put beneath that the rod inside so it is elevated and extracted from the vein, and suspend it in an inch above the lion.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then you should section another section next to that section for three fingers, and then scarify the vein of the partition below the vein so it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then you elevate it and insert it in the back section of their thigh, and then extract it and elevate it so it is poured out through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And make it so that you extract it from the section that is most above or most outer of all the sections, until everything is poured out; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then introduce a strong double-threaded needle and tie it up and extract it, or introduce beneath the rod and rotate your hand on all sides until it is grasped.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not inserted; for if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that member and it comes upon the patient for that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all the humors have been evacuated, then pause over the place of the open wound with a mixture of oil and rose water and non-rose water, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the life is contracted having twisted to that which is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then be aware that you should bend over that entire twisting of theirs and the places of their envelopment, and then suspend it in an inch until it elevates entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that you do not insert the section into the vein and that it does not harm that, for it will be difficult for you to elevate that; and keep your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Method of inserting the section where life is divided:
Forma de unci orp:	Method of a single inch:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to be inserted thus with the inches nor of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of gross flexibility of the loin, for if it were subtle, it would insert the vein by its subtlety; but instead it is in the superfluous grossness thus as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the veins of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs on dry and cold lands, just as in the land of the Arabs and in the lands of India, which are dry and arid with little fertility, and in which there are no herbs nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is generated strongly in other places of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is of putrefaction that you see beneath the vein, just as venomous reptiles and worms and scorpions are generated between the vein and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the signal of the suspicion of its advent is from this vein that causes inflammation violently in the leg; and then the place is blistered; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that blistering which seems to resemble a plant's root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then it appears from there to the extremity, then you should wrap around that one piece of lead whose weight is that of a dram, inside two drams, and now take away that and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times as the juices of its certain cause are in the parts beforehand, envelop it in lead and remove that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the member is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and envelop the remaining; and do not insert that by root until it is entirely evacuated, for if you insert that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes aposteme and putrefaction in the place and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For you should be careful that it is treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is entirely evacuated from the back of it and none of its cause remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it is said that some men are in their longitude of 5 palms and of toes, and already I have found one who reached 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then introduce the rod into the channel of it and perforate that in the long channel in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medications; and then cure that by the cure of apostemes.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has many times moved to the foot, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its foot orrificis, and is said to be from some orrifici ram.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure it thus as we have said in the division and I will show you what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	About the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called cow's disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some lands as cow's disease because many moist vapors go out from the flesh and it is a few worms that are born between the gut and the flesh, and they spread throughout the whole body, weakening and destroying the joints, and it shows its effects by dissolving the gut and going outward.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors, thus accumulating worms and serpents and roundworms and ascarids in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, it pierces the veil, then strongly breaks down the veil within it, and many moist vapors go out.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not proceed unless you have the suitable walking and application of it to the sentiment, and then you will understand what is above it and what is below it in liaison and strong constriction, and thus you will dry over it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not come out, then you apply a cautery iron to the area until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the limb, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Perhaps it has penetrated to the head near the veil, then you will strongly hold onto the eyebrows with a strong structure, and thus you will dry over it, and extract it; and you know that the disease is of mondification of the whole body through medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and beware of frequent generations of putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	About the section on naive disease of the nave (or "naval" disease).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is named in our land as nave's disease, and it is pain that goes into certain members, and thus it spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that according to what I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to a sick woman in a town, and you discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after being massaged for an hour, you saw that inflammation go away thus as it was going down to this, but rather more lightly because it seemed to be porous, thus if it were silver you would see how it corrodes from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I put myself in the pain of that place and fixed myself in the muscle, and thus I stayed for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And thus I ran to the other body part until I reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And thus I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the whole body according to what you saw; and it was too marvellous about the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that in my own veins according to that manner, however I have seen many things which cause pain to be permuted from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I do not see it in the veins thus as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was thus except that it is because the woman was of vile nature, with dry body and discovered veins, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that permutated windiness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-action in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with mixed veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at the vein thus as we have said, then hold strongly onto it and let it be lightly treated and dried over it until that constricted windiness is expelled, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not find it in your own veins, then you cure it with evacuation of the body and that which expels windiness, and you eliminate those foul pills and pills of serpent and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	About the extraction of arrowheads.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrowheads are diversified according to the species, and according to the places in the body where they fall, because their diversity is that of those which have large points, and small ones, and concave, and rough, so they are solid; and of those which have three angles, and of those which have tongues; and of those which have astellas (a type of arrowhead).
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the wounds in which they fall is according to two manners: because the members or principal members are concave, thus as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, and bladder, and their similar things; and then when you cut into one of these members and appear to your signs of death, which cause I recommend to you, then you know that you should avoid extraction of that arrowhead in those where death is more likely, and when you do not appear with those bad signs, and the arrowhead is not lodged in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	Of the signs of service are when it is seen in the sagittal section, and it crosses the bones, and it is situated on the cisterna, which is above the brain, because it accumulates vehemently in the soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the wheels, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and perplexity of understanding and vomit of cholera, and the voice is absent and is destroyed the vote, and it is situated on the place of the plague humid white similar to a pulse, and yes of it similar to being affected by the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if you appear to have these signs, then you abstain from the treatment and extraction of the sagittal section, if it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The signs of the sagittal section when it is seen in the heart, so that it is close to the left breast, and I feel that it is fixed due to a hard cause, and it is not a fleeting cause; and the voice has movement similar to a pulse, and it corrodes with black gangrene, and it dries out that coldness of the extremities, and it freezes the flesh, and it syncopates; and so you know that death descends upon all who have it.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the sagittal section has affected the lung, so it is filled with bloody spumous phlegm of the plague, and the veins that are near the colon become apostematous, and the color of the patient's skin is altered, and they exhale a great amount of spirit, and demand strong attraction of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if you see the sagittal section in the wrapping that is on the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes great vehement pain and breathing difficulty, and it does not move all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you see the sagittal section in the stomach, then it is a sign of plague with some kind of indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you see the sagittal section in the belly, and it is fixed in it, it is a sign of some kind of plague ulcer, or the web, or hernia that is dislocated, and there is no hope in the treatment of extracting the sagittal section.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the sagittal section is seen in the bladder, and it is obstructing urine, and it processes some cause to the previous parts, and then there is pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members also, such as the face, the neck, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the joints, and the vertebrae of the back, and the fork, and the hip, and the leg, and their similarities to the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the sagittal section does not obstruct a vein or artery and is not a venomous sagittal section.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these sagittal sections, so that they signify for you about the treatment tied to them.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is the cause, because in one case the sagittal section falls into the lacrimal duct of the eye, and I extract it from one part to another, leaving the gray matter of the aurelia, and it is healthy, and does not accumulate in the eye's humor.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extract another sagittal section from a Jew who had it in his gray matter of the eye, behind the eyelid, and the sagittal section was hidden and not conquered by that except for a small extremity that adhered to the eye's foundation, and it was a great sagittal section of the sharp sagittal sections of the Turks, like a fierce lion in which there were no aurelia.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew is healthy, and it does not happen to the eye's humor bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another sagittal section from a Christian who had it in the gullet, and it was an Arabic sagittal section, and it is that which has aurelia; and then I incised above that between two guides, and it was submerged in the gullet of his; and then I subtly lifted it, and I extracted it, and the Christian is healthy.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another sagittal section from a man who had it in his belly, and I thought that he would die from that; and then, since thirty days passed and it did not move on account of any of its dispositions, I incised above the sagittal section and engaged with it, and he is healthy, and no bad accident happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom a sagittal section fell into his back, and the plague was consolidated over him, and since he did not get up for seven years, I extracted the sagittal section from the roots of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom a sagittal section fell into her belly, and the plague is consolidated inside her, and it does not move according to its dispositions in reality, and the woman does not obstruct any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom a sagittal section fell into his face and the plague is consolidated, and it breaks the sagittal section, not obstructing much pain, and many similarities to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the sagittal section of the man of the princes of the king who had it in his nose's middle place and it had declined to the right part a little, and the whole sagittal section was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called to cure it by applying the remedy of the sage within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you attributed the plague of the sage to being strongly stretched; and then you inquired about that subtle tenta, and did not feel it; but rather the sensation was pointed at the right ear, and then you suspected that the puncture was due to the extremity of the sage.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And you applied plaster to the place where it was placed, which is attractive and digestive, convincing me that the place would be apostemized so that it appears to me as the place of the sage, so that it succeeds over that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And you didn't notice the significant accident that the sage had reached that place; and you continued to apply plaster over it for many days without noticing an accident; and the plague was consolidated, meanwhile, and the patient was relieved of the extremity of it for many days until one day I felt the sage inside my nose and recognized it as mine.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you paused on the acute corrosive medicinal plague for many days until it was opened, and with that tent you tested it, and strongly attributed the extremity of the subtle sage, which adheres to the foundation.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjusted in the perception of the plague for that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the sage, and I passed time on that for a period of time until four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then because the plague was amplified, and it became possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I remained there, and did not obey the sentiment, since you did not cease to subtle and ingenious about that in many ways of ingenuity, until one day began on that in many ways of ingenuous pendre descentment to extract it with forceps, according to the form of those at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored the plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and you restored it and the plague is consolidated, and it is healthy through entire sanctity, and I did not notice any cause in it.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And you recommended to you the quality of extraction of some sages for pauses that rule and significance over what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended in narration nor do they comprehend those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisans know how to compare a little about many things; and it is present over what is absent; and they perform new operations and novel instruments, which are given to the descent of the external causes of the art when they accelerate.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore you say that sages are not forgotten from the members in which they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by contrast with the other party.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is forgotten by the place where it enters, or is a sage proceeding from a carnal place, and is attracted and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the sentiment of the hour in which it happens, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purged, and its attraction and egress are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is fixed in you and does not obey your sentiment, then leave that for some days and try that in attraction and motion on any day, and already it is forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your sentiment for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the sage on that whole part of the total party subtly until the place is amplified by the sage, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the sage is fixed in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient with those accidents which you have said, then abstain from the extraction of the sage and leave it until the sight can be equalized for some days; because if the sage passes to the ciphalic, then death is not prolonged to him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the sage is not fixed but only in the body of the bone, and does not pass into the ciphalic, and the patient remains for some days, and no accidents occur to him from those causes, then you engage in the attraction of the sage and in its attraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is strongly fixed and does not obey your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the sage as I have recommended, and then cure the place until it is healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the sage is already hidden in the place of the body, and is hidden from sentiment, then you inquire about that subtle tenta, and if you feel it, then attract it with some instruments which are convenient for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the plague and the length of the preon, and here there are neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you feel over the plague until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the sage.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have held the patient's ears, then you will liberate the flesh where it is stuck to the entire affected area so that you may be able to remove; and investigate above that, if you cannot get past the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in twisting of those entrails.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then you use your hand with forceps on all internal parts so that it makes an effort; and subtly use a subtle delicacy so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot get past that at your time, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are in its circuit can be purified, and then you iterate that which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Perhaps if you have made a contrary flow of blood, then you administer that which we have said about the cure in the seventh chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And beware of your vertebrae's incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer gentle manipulation in all possible ways to facilitate the evacuation of the arrow; and make it easy and tranquil and slow and firm, just like you and your recommended treatment.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus you make a counter-action to the arrow so that the patient's figure is according to the shape in which the arrow has been embedded, because it is more just and beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Perhaps if that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Perhaps the arrows that are forgotten for the opposite part of the other side, or which have already proceeded to some part of the outside, or have made the extremity of the arrow swollen by sentiment of the part above the codena propenda and sometimes that eminent; then you see about that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then you attract it, because it is made lighter for the judgment.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Perhaps if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to counter-action so that the arrow emerges from the bone, and amplify its measurement, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for some days, and then iterate that until you see improvement.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you pull it out with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Perhaps if the shaft has fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then you introduce it, if it is dull, strongly fix it so that it enters the cavity of the arrow in the hollow of the shaft and then pull it out with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Perhaps if the arrow is concave, then you pull it out with a strong instrument entering into that, because the arrow is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should hollow out all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then cure it with that which is convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow has fallen into the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is close to where you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to see about that, then see about that and beware of incision of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then apply a compress if it is indicted, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The way to use forceps is with those that are adapted to attract the arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Like the extremities of birds with a beak like an eagle's, which are made sharp like a saw when they take hold of the arrow so that it does not let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are made many special modes, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of the slight weakness, and of the amplitude of the wound, and of the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The way to pull out with this concave extremity is like a penalty of an eagle's claw so that the instrument of the arrow is alleviated in it, and pulls out strongly.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The way to pull out with a strong extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like a beam for the sake of alleviating the instrument in the arrow's concave cavity and it is pulled out with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On the phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy, which normally customarily phlebotomize thus... of those that are in chapter 16. there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	More veins that are swollen in the arms are. Because of those it is a cephalic one, and it descends from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it's noisy, and it's a migiera vein, and it's composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and the people name that "vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and it's called "citillar", and the commoners call that "vein of the belly"; and it ends at the arm, and it's placed over the focus, and it's there where it becomes swollen, and it's there that appears over the fingers for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it's the vein that is between the auricular finger and the little finger, and so in both arms.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is that which arises from the curvature of the knee of the wild lettuce; and the second is sophena, and its place is below the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for chronic and migrating and sahaftic and ulcerous bad headaches.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding from those is according to what you recommend to yourself: it is that it should be rubbed on the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the occiput in the place of both veins with a gentle friction; then strongly hold the patient's seat with a bandage entering that appears in the two places near the ears on both sides of the head; and search for it in the entire finger, and if you feel the pulse of those in the entire finger, there you will find it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incisive, and then you introduce it below the vein in the codeina so that the swollen blood comes out to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then you raise your hand on the vein and codeina to the upper parts and incise the vein with an incisive cut in an incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision is the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strongly hold the poultices and apply them to it so that it becomes healthy.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the treatment of swelling is for ancient and badly deviated and assiduous obtalmia and body of acute overflowing fluids to the wheels.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of swelling those is according to what you recommend to yourself: constrict the patient's seat with a motive that appears in both veins to manifest appearance and demonstrate the pulse of those in the entire finger; and then you will find it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the codeina above the vein to the upper parts of the entire finger, and introduce the swollen blood incidentally below, and raise the vein in its place; and incise it thus as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then you release the constriction of the patient, and place the entire finger on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that joint and poultices and strongly hold it above with a strong constriction, and apply it so that it becomes healthy.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now the remembrance of them is preceding, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so the treatment of swelling of the vein of the forehead is for the swelling of the cephalic vein to ancient evils of the face and migrating and rough and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the swelling of it is according to what you recommend to yourself; it is that the patient strongly holds the seat with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is the form of it:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop at the prominent point which is at the head of the fossor on that vein and percuss it with a pin or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and strongly hold it so that it becomes healthy.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some swollen veins are opened in the swollen latent, however it does not cover that the swelling is of acute extremity thus as the other swellings, unless it is of the lazy extremity, and swells that according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strongly holds the trencary in it the swelling when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More the treatment of the two veins that are as lacrimal of two wheels for scabies of the wheels by roughness and sebaceous in the wheels, and to the evils of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient stretches out their neck in a bandage, and then you perform the bloodletting there, and you stand over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	It is done the bloodletting according to the transverse and longitudinal method with little bloodletting in a few places, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is subtle, then the extremity of the patient is wounded.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then run out the blood as much as is necessary to you, and stop on those joints, and stretch them for one night, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The bloodletting of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and strong sweating, and for the diseases of the face and migraines and redness that occurs on the face, and it is more effective when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient stretches out their neck and you place your left hand on their nose, and take the subtle bloodletting from the vein at the bridge of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the sensation here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Make sure you ultimately put your hand on the small bloodletting point by point and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, because that is restored with great relief.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The help of the bloodletting of the two guiding veins leads to a constriction of the bad and a commencement of the leprosy and many evil diseases and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers, also with herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the bloodletting of those is that the patient stretches out each one on their neck with a ligament; and there are the artificial devices over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform the bloodletting on the vein at length with small and ample bloodletting point by point; and then extract blood according to temperate quantity or according to what is needed at that time; and then make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the ligament and stretch the two veins with a moderate structure so that the patient is not suffocated, and lay them down in the morning because the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the help of the bloodletting of the Algerich veins is beneficial for small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and for bad ulcers that are on the nose and in their circumference.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the bloodletting of those is that you make the patient sit down in front of you, and stretch their neck with a bandage, and then revolve their lips and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of both, and that is why there are many small black veins in their circumference; and then you insert each one for an incidental insertion.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt in you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you understand the incision of the larger one of those, and of the most manifest one of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it similar to the two veins that are on the upper lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to extract blood from the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The help of the two veins that are below the tongue is to perform the bloodletting of the cephalic vein for suffocations that are in the throat, for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting those is that you follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and lift their tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bloodlet those; and be careful that you do not ultimately put your hand on the bloodletting of those, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the two veins that are bloodletted in the body are those in which blood is customarily collected from all homes, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two manners, either by putting the bloodletting mirror or olive green subtlety declining; or by cutting with a fleam, and calling it "alnessil", and this is their form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this "alnessil" is that which converges to a section and of those special sides and subtle ones according to the amplitude of the veins and according to their structure.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of bloodletting mirror:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is the side of it also with times, and converges to open the concave full veins apparently gross, and to those that contain gross blood turbulent.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of bloodletting olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and converges to bloodletting of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	More of the juice from the flebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood from the bad humors that are deposited in the gouty foot and colon, and thus it cleanses the chest and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is convenient for the flebotomizer, when he performs that flebotomy, to hold the vein well and be above it in fear of it, because it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause flows of blood, so that he may not perform flebotomies with a pungent flebotomy, unless he is skilled like an expert.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear through a manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave it and move to another, or seek some other ramification; or that you perform flebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and thus you will have performed flebotomy with expert skill as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	More, if you want to perform flebotomy on the thigh, then it is necessary to denude the structure of the arm that touches the place inside where you conjoin the place of the pulses, and place a sign above the hand in tension; and place the arm and thus you will have performed flebotomy with expert skill as we have said; and beware that you do not strike percussion on any space of the place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you strike, with a strong liaison, inflammation occurs at the place where you have touched with tension, then that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and thus avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the flebotomy as if from a child's vein, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is from the artery's blood; and then you touch and pause the tie there for a long space; and place the tie there, and if the blood stops, because many veins are stopped, then you strengthen the arm and release it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And beware of the patient's moaning from that, and be above-fearful of it and do not touch it for some days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	More, if the blood does not stop, and it seems that you do not have present medicine for that, then you insert the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is constricted, and the blood is stopped; or take a small thread of floss, and do that, and take one vein and strengthen it over the place of the vein with descending structure in liaison and with pulvils until another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then cure it with the water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the wound and the possibility of the liaison of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	More, from the dark vein, the flebotomy is juice that extracts the blood from the superior part of the head and to the inferior part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is necessary for the flebotomizer to be above-fearful in the flebotomy of it, because below that is a nerve; and then if he adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy and touches the nerve, he will cause stupor, and it is difficult to heal it, and often it does not heal completely. And this nerve appears with many veins at the sentiment; and if it is hidden at some homes and is subtle and does not show, then it is necessary that you pause the flebotomy in the way that you perform flebotomies with expert skill, and avoid the nerve with your fortitude.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you will find the vein in its longitude.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The juice of the flebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the bad humors of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is necessary in this property, if you want to perform flebotomy with a pungent flebotomy olive or myrtle flebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, because it is not below an artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	More, Emperor, it is convenient for you to have the flebotomy that beware lest the flebotomy does not puncture the head of the lizard so suddenly, and seek the place more lightly, and do not touch it, if it is not struck by the primary percussion that is above the flebotomy with some veins.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	More, Emperor, it is strong that you are apostemized in some homes, when it is not flebotomized by the primary percussion, more do not touch anything regarding that aposteme.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	More, the quality of the flebotomy of that and the accidents of it are so many, in which you need to think about their rectification.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of it is that you need to know that flebotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for the hope of it and caution against the coming of bad humors, and that it be performed flebotomy on one of the veins that are in the body, thus: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and that it be performed flebotomy at the beginning of spring, above fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the digestion, when it appears with signs of replenishment.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	It should be a feverish bout of flatulence on the third day or at the first pus that has passed three hours since yesterday morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Greater is the flatulence that is administered, greater is the convenience and necessity to evacuate it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in any circumstances.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is known that if the infant has not had flatulence until he is fourteen years old, and a woman who has not had flatulence until the fourth month within the seventh, and the veins are not flatulent which have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And since it is good to be flatulent for any manner of being, it is known that the mondifique (womb) purifies the intestines within the flatulence by cleansing the veins, if in those there is retained matter, so that the veins do not attract superfluous fluids in the flatulence of the intestines, which are pure, and do not disturb the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And there are no flatulent patients with nauseous and sacretive crapula, nor do they evacuate from malady or from ebriety until it is removed from their loins, nor from hydropic malady, and it is more that flatulence is tempered by a proper colic passion and vomiting, and a proper belly pain, and a proper multiplication of the gut and of trouble and of exercise of fasting or of vigilias and of all causes that dissolve virtue, whether it is a corporal28 or animal one.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And properly consider the subtlety of humors within it if the blood is gross, with vines and beasts, and with medicines if it is possible to reduce it to its proper limit.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And properly enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or is excited by some exercise so that the blood may be subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the flatulence of it in the feet of the day, so it is around the hour of Terce (Terce is a canonical hour, approximately 9:00 am), thus as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And beware that the feet of that one are guarded on that day from all evil accidents, animals, thus as is anguish, ire, fear, and from all corporal accidents, thus as is trouble and pain and superfluous gut and semblance to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in its sessile surface, let the causes be present in the use of which correct custom of the men is accustomed to aromaticity and odorament and with balms and semblance to those according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the flatulence administrator over a cushion that is placed above the cushion of that one who should be flatulent.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And properly extract the sieve's arm, and rub that with its hand the flatulence administrator for two or three times; and properly strengthen the ligament in the correct way and involve those two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And it is the tempered structure, because the structure when not engorged, or the structure is superfluous, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is mollified, and then it prohibits the body's blood essence.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And properly the structure, it is known that one who should be flatulent rubs his hands repeatedly between them until the veins are inflated, and are declared to the sentiment.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And properly the flatulence administrator anoints the sieve of flatulence with a few drops of ancient proper oil; and properly pause the sieve of indication on the left hand over that vein, below the place where you want the flatulence, so that the vein receives a few drops, and the percussion is seated because of the veins it is that which attracts thus as a fleeing cord gives rise to flatulence, and of those it is full of windiness and when it pauses the flatulence on that one, it is contracted thus as the flatulence administrator; and the flatulence does not overcome the vein, and if it overcomes, that one is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for that reason it is known that the flatulence administrator should be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And properly pause the flatulence, more if the vein is opened in one way, then it is good; and if not, you iterate another way below that place a little, or above where there is festination, if the place is not apostematized.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is apostematized, or the malady spreads, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligament, because a strong apostema attracts caution, nor do you enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And properly iterate flatulence if it loves.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is petite and corrects the blood subtly, and you fear that it does not give the quantity that you want, then you iterate the flatulence in that passage according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little, and do so with festination within that place is apostematized, because the place is apostematized in many homes where there is little perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	More if the times are already apostematized, then do not iterate over it, because it does not excuse you from any cause; and pause on that certain part of the wound of oil, because it alleviates the body's blood essence.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place with oil and that the other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	It seems that the medicine is administered by pouring oil into the entire flebotomy area where the flebotomes, which are veins, prohibit the flow of blood in the body, and when this tyriaca is poured into one of those areas above the spot, because the blood is subtle and revolves when it is gross.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the area of the flebotomy a great abscess is generated, because many veins are gathered together, and it is especially suitable for one who has not been bled except that vein, or in the perception of the small vein, and then you touch, and pause on the spot, applying a sponge infused with water and salt, a little scalded, and hold it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to make that approach the sentiment of the blood in that vein, either in complement of it or of another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you find in the spot for several days some blackness or viridity, do not notice that; and if you want, pause on that cause of aloen and of mirra dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or of calendula or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many gathered veins thus produce abscesses and eminent signs of flebotomy in the basilica (vein).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over that, and if then you feel a softness of the compression on that, then that sign is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you pause on that cause of that which we have said, because it strengthens the flow of the arterial blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an implant in that which is stipulated, so that the spot becomes hardened, and then take care to heal that with another cure until it is healthy.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract from the blood of every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears over the blood, as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it flow out until it becomes subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, until the acidity of it is stopped.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a vein, that the flebotomy of the vein be amplified and the flebotomes be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in one who is frail, the opposite of that should be done, and it is necessary to extract that in many veins, and that the trachea should be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best way to administer in flebotomy of a vein is that it should be cross-sectional, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of flebotomy is free from the flow of blood and irritation of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and more safe than flebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And at the time when it is accustomed to come upon syncopes of the flebotomy, and it is necessary that you cure that during the flebotomy with a small piece of cloth infused in wine of milgranas or of simple oximel scalded; and extract from there three or four veins.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is complicated by complexity, then take beforehand during the flebotomy to infuse in a syrup of mirra or in a syrup of mel aromatized with special spices such as pepper, cane, ginger and similar, or in a syrup aromatized and very fragrant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncopes of the flebotomy occur, and it is a cause of much blood issuance, then it is necessary to take in drinking water of carn and syrup very fragrant subtle; and use aromaticity with algae, and be limited to the seven feet in that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncopes for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to evacuate the seven veins and dissolve the seven blood vessels secondarily, it is necessary for him from whom the flebotomy is for much evacuation, and the virtue of it is fragile, that evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to evacuate the seven veins, and cut the seven blood vessels secondarily, and the seven bodies are strong, then make that approach for seven hours or nine of the first flebotomy day.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to attract the blood of the seven bodies against the contrary of the party that declines, it is necessary to evacuate on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is much blood already scalded and acidic and makes fever occur, it is necessary to cut the blood in one vein and be of great quantity and amplify the perception until it occurs syncopes, since you have conserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the body's blood vessels, so that no death occurs in the spot of syncopes, because many veins end there when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not suitable when you want to release the vein and evacuate the blood secondarily, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult for the blood issuance, that you press underneath with vehemence and the curvature is extended lengthwise, because that is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the patient lie down so that the flow of blood is slowed down secondarily; or remove what is in the way of the blood flow that is coagulated in the narrowness of the vein; or apply on top of that a poultice of dragon's blood, or of sagzenea, and compress it with a ligature so that the blood flows out slowly.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to provoke the evacuation of blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then you will bleed him at that spot or in another arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis of the arm" is flow-blocked in the area of the fork or of the basilica, when they are not constricted or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the blood flow in him is that the patient inserts his hand into warm water so that the focal point becomes red and the vein appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it is strengthened over that same ligament with a mild stricture; and then the blood flow is directed according to the small transverse, not latitudinally nor according to the longitude.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it is a broad perception and it is your blood flow that you direct towards the junction of the hand, a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the blood flow is prohibited, then you soak the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you obtain what you need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	However if you were in the summer days, then you are exempt from soaking the hand in warm water, and it is during winter time that the course of the blood is placed in warm water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the blood flow of this vein is more saved than all the other veins, because there it has no pulsating vein, nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the blood flow of the little vein of the right hand is conducive to the illnesses of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the blood flow in him is that you strengthen the hand with a ligament or with your own hand, because you have put it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the witness; and then the blood flows transversely; and if you insert it into the whole nostril, you will not know what is being done there.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to overdo your hand in the blood flow, because then it is the nerves of the fingers that are exposed and stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then soak the hand in warm water and let the blood flow in it, because if you do not soak it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the narrowness of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of need, then you pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly, take care that you do everything in a straight and tight manner.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	However, the improvement of the blood flow of that vein of the left hand is conducive to the illnesses of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in his blood flow as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the improvement of the cephalic vein in the blood flow is for the illnesses that are below the belly, as well as the illnesses of the mother, and for retention of menses, and for the illnesses of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and old wounds, and for their similar illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the blood flow in him is that the patient inserts his foot into warm water and makes friction on it until the veins appear; and he puts it on the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein shows itself beneath the toes, and from there it ramifies on the surface of the foot to the toes.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then blood flows more amply from there below the leg to the heel and to the aggregation of it, because it is better and more healthy.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you blood-flow it on the surface of the foot, then you beware of the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and pause your blood flow in the way you blood-flow it through the crossing, lest you want to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And it is a visible blood flow.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	However, if the blood flow is prohibited; then you soak his foot in warm water and let the blood flow out of it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the blood-flow doctor errs in the first vein, then soak it in his own blood flow, because the place is healthy; and do not fear his evil, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same with the cephalic vein of the other foot in the same way.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the place is similarly as we have said beneath the heel below the hollow of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the improvement of the blood flow in him is for pain in the ankle when it is due to cold blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that they enter into a bath, and fasten and strengthen the thigh of the patient from the ankle to above the foot for four fingers in a long subtle bandage, because it does not appear as if for anything else.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you fleubotomize that according to each engineer who says it is possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or inject it for injection or section it for section, because the place of the patient is healthy.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most homes somewhat hidden; and if you touch it, and it does not appear at all sentiment, then fleubotomize some vein of the patient, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the auricular and ring fingers.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and make sure to run with the blood the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the structure and pause over the place of the fleubotomia, and strengthen the place, because gradually it is healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilate with horns, or with iron, or with a vein.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two manners: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two manners, because it is either with a focus or without a focus.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilations that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are 13 places of the body, among which one is where pauses are made for ventilation in the armpit, and it is the last part of the head; and the thousandth place of the arm beside the two parts of the neck; and ventilations beneath the mandible below the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of alohoster, and it is above the end of the hip; and ventilations of two focuses, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavities; and ventilations of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small sparse veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not catch virtue through them, thus as it is accustomed to do for fleubotomia; nor does it cover that ventilation should be done with a focus or without a focus in any malady done for replenishment until the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if it is necessary to provoke ventilation for a malady or for continuity, administer it at every hour from the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in the homes where blood is multiplied within them until it demands extraction through ventilation and touches the heavy head with gravity; and of those it is that they touch replenishment and vigor on their face and on their head, and on their neck; and of those it is that they touch prurience on their face and on their forehead and darkness and faintness in their eyes; and of those who throw away the place of their ventilation; and of those it is that their flow is multiplied; and of those it is that they taste blood in their mouth, or that the tongue is affected and spits blood; and of those it is that their sleep is multiplied, and of those who vomit blood in their sleep with rigor and antiquity and plagues and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens in any of those causes, and properly if it is on the third or middle of the month, then command ventilation to be done more than two or three hours past the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the youthful benefit of ventilation of the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and at what is profound in the eyes; but it covers that this should be a proper evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the place of fleubotomia of the cephalic (head).
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not lawful to use that which is of complete friction, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great annoyance.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason it does not cover that the use of those is old, and in the heads of which there are frequent maladies.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to him who continues above that which is done oblivion; and for this reason it covers that you command the ventilator to pause his hand a little at the ventous parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation of the alkehel is in the place of fleubotomia of the dark vein and of the basilica: and for this reason it confers asthma, and to the constriction of the wings and to the scission of the instrument of the wings, and to all, and to replenishment.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it covers that the ventilation of the alkehel is impelled a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debilitation in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, and emigration, and preface, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleubotomia of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you should command the ventilator to not press their hand on the scarification so that the artery is not cut and fluid flows from it.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And you should ventilate by applying cotton to the mouth, and corrupting the gum, and it seems like one of the evils that are in the mouth, and instead of a florid botany that is on the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	More ventilation that is done over the two spatulas confers heat, which is done for replenishment of warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two divided parts of the focal points confers juvenation of the florid botany of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca and cephalica, because it attracts the blood from all those veins plus manifold that are in the flesh, and those slender veins from the other gross veins enter so that perversion attracts to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventilator to not proceed with scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and instead of that, it has nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventilation that is ventilated over the hips and confers on the hemorrhoids of the buttock and the ulcers, instead.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should command the ventilator to be a great ventilation, and that it be of iron, because the place indicates a strong desiccation; and strongly they have traumatized subtle ventilations and it is scarified in scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More ventilations of the minor channels are manifested for minimal manifestation, because they attract the blood from all the body, and confer on ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruations, and confer on bother and adhesion; and instead of a florid botany of two siphons, and of the auricula, and of two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Empirical method to debilitate the whole body and make an accident in many homes.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the ventilations of the auricula, the juvenation is propagated to the juvenation through the ventilations of two channels.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the ventilations is that it pauses the ventilation at the beginning of the void and sucks for temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the ventilations, but rather pauses those lightly, and remains coagulated, and so that the humors come to the place for adventitious ingression.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease iterating that and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen and that appears the rigor of the blood.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who has tender flesh from rare pores, you should scarify him gently and not strongly, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the ventilator to amplify the scarification and take a little, and temper the suction to facilitate it.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is gross, then you should scarify two gentle times, because in the first gentle time it opens the way of subtlety to the blood and to its acquosity.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More in the second, there is scrutiny acquired from the extraction of gross blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very filthy, then a third scarification should be made for the third gentle time, so that it purges the dirt.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is gross, then you should scarify with profound scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the profundity of the codena only so much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that one whose codena is gross, hard, fusca, and the sieus pores are so strait, you should make the places of the ventilations very gentle, open and resolute; if it is in summer, thus as it is oil of aloen or oil of violet, or oil of tender shoots, or oil of cemensa of coja; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of liri, or oil of camamilla, or of blood, and to those that seem.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superflooding is gross, fresh, then the oil should be amaranthine, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloen, or oil of anet, and to those that seem.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	More if the ventilator is of ample pores of tender flesh, then you should prohibit oil, and command that to those places of ventilations of their own proper ventilation, whether it be washed with warm waters or fresh water of solatrum, or water of coja, or water of bordolaguas, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose blood is of much humidity, wash its ventilations with wine vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And that one whose superflooding is gross, wash its ventilations with wine anticum, or water of sansuc, which is majorana, or decoction of anet, or camamilla, and to those that seem.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	It is necessary that the ventilation should be watched from the beginning of the bath; it is necessary that it be administered at the same moment of the bath for an hour or two, and it is necessary to sleep afterwards with the ventilation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is required to be regulated is that bloodletting should be done from the veins before ventilation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	You should consider the beginning: then if the ventilator or he who is to be bled is choleric and vents about the thin blood and inflammation, then you should take causes of cooling, such as milk of acetosas, and endive in a wine agreeable and laxatives, and scammon, and julip, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause at the suitable times, as with poultices, and pieces of soft boiled eggs, and cooked vegetables with herbs, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that one whose complexion is fresh, you should take in drink essence of roses, or essence of scammon of serene thoughts, and sumac, and very odorant mixture between viel and noel; and it is commanded that use be made of paucity of drink and of eating, and pause the vegetables of his poultice and cannabis and peppers and small eggs and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of ventilation and bloodletting, the drink should be more abundant than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary that there be given in drink at certain hours to certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or citrine before ventilation or before bloodletting or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtled; and it is not necessary that they take that scalf.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The ventilations that are scarified are those that are paused on the feet, and on the worse part and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the pixida of the narrow, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those except attraction of blood from a member, as with poultice on the thigh in malady of flux of blood of the veins; and use of that to dissolve fresh ventilated viscosity of the member, as with poultice on the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and scales it and reduces the pain since it resolves ventilation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is paused on the joints when they accumulate in their opacity or pores, because through virtue of strong attraction the humble opacity and eradicates the pores from their place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it is done when it is paused on the feet and worse part, so that ventilation is induced in those enclosed areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventilations are administered with suction as much as possible; and some are administered at the fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of water tepid in the maladies of the worse part.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the ventilation should be full and should be bigger, so it is warm water alone or water in which are cooked herbs to that convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of ventilation administered at the fire: let the amplitude of the orifice be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the punction should be the size of a palm; and let it be in the width of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the size of it, the tube should be small according to the quantity that enters into it through a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of iron or copper, with thick margins, lion, hinges and ties so that it does not leave the member its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be in the middle of the iron or copper transverse rod, where the candle is paused at the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And it is this big ventilation greater than the one which we have recommended; and the lesser pause of that according to the maladies and the state of he who uses that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventilations of the exhausted and thin ones are others than the ventilations of the young and of thick corporatures.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this ventilation at the fire on the member is that it extends the flame at the fire decently from a pause of a candle of wax, and pauses it on the middle of the transverse rod in the middle place of the ventilation, so that the fire is kindled around the part below, so that the body of the patient is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it is paused on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the tube that we have said, until when we have the ventilations and do not induce that the finger opens and the vapor exits over that tube, then the ventilation will be almost dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And properly ignite the flame according to its manner, and then that is induced if they are induced from that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	There is a ventilation that is administered in the malady of flatulence, with water, in which there is no transverse rod nor tube, and it is not administered except that it is full of water, and it is paused on the member as much as possible.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this vaporous matter, the more it is abundant, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 147.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in many members, but rather in those members where it is not possible to apply cups, due to the scarcity of those, thus like the foot and gum, which resemble them; or in a denuded member of flesh, thus like the finger and nose, which resemble them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting cups which are on the thick, fleshy parts of the body.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then lay them in thick water overnight so that they become soft, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with fleabotomia and cups; and then wash the patient's members until they are red; and then place them on top of it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and fall.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck from the place where the cup is, it is better to delay in giving aid.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, then wash the place with vinegar and then apply much water; and it should be washed and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood is prolonged by the removal of the cups, and it is residue, then dip a cloth in cold water, and place that on top until the residue is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then powder on top of it with triturated vitriol, or gall and similar to those of the stiptic causes, until the blood is absorbed; or place on the spot the crushed heads of roasted fava beans, and leave them on until they adhere to the spot, and the blood is absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And be careful, if it is necessary, repetition of bloodletting, when it is possible to move those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the bloodletting cups are prohibited from suspension, then wash the place with recent blood or stick a needle in the places until it reaches blood; and then place them, because those who feel any blood at all adhere to it.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall, powder on top of them a little triturated aloe, or salt, or cinder, and it will fall immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and common people, who for some time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this manner of the sciences on our earth is private; and I do not have it and oblige in anything at all times; and I do not adapt to what comes after, except by long reading of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, until I extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I direct my experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that which contains my science and on which I have passed my experiment; for I have abbreviated it to you others and delivered it from occupation of elongation; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed it into many forms of instruments which are administered in that, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I did in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter First.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which the necessary preliminary is, before we begin the remembrance of fractured members and diverse ones, if singular.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I will discuss in the prohemium of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which at the beginning are foreseen by the artisans and a station on the truth of those; so it is you and those who are prompt that they know or apprehend this noble art better than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when accidents happen, such as fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall, then it is necessary for you to turn to the beginning with fleabotomia or to lift up that, or whatever steps, if no cause prohibits, thus as debilitation of virtue, or it is that which happens suddenly, or in decrepitating, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and lean meats of birds and crabs; and prohibit gross meats and fill up on diets and all diets that fill the veins of blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first regimen, in which they customarily corrode with it.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And then, as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary for the patient to be fed with nutritious diets of subtle and gross nutriment, thus as viscous diets made from wheat flour cooked in water, and rice, and capers, and peas, and cow's stomachs, and hooves, and fresh fish, and gross and similar to those, and on this regimen it is done coagulation of fracture by ligament and marrow.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	It seems that the bones are brittle when they are in the men who were in the prime of life and in decay, it is not possible that they can continue and consolidate according to their nature for the desiccation of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are consolidated and continue according to their nature all the time for the desiccation of those limbs, and they continue and consolidate those that are theirs at the end of old age, just as the bones of small children are fragile.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But the Emperor of Nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of the whole affected part for a similar cause that seems like glue in which it is thickened so that it adheres and strengthens until it becomes conglutinated and reunited, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the veins of the patient, veins in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, just as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many varieties of fracture according to the variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And it is known that the species of fracture are diverse according to the variety of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other limbs are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will come to a remembrance of each species of fracture, explained in its own distinct chapter apart from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many varieties of fracture in the same member.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their members; because there is made an arched fracture another that which occurs in the stars; and some veiled ones are made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the cartilage and tendons, proceeding and not-proceeding, just as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to each species there is a proper torment or treatment in the restoration of it according to what will come as a remembrance of it in its own distinct place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many signs of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by which a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is the twisting of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the sentiment, and so of it when it comprehends with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor does it feel deviated from its proper touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	However, it is possible that there is a twisting or small fissure, so much that you do not feel it with your hand and total compression; however, pause over it from the medications of which I have remembrance to apply at that moment what is convenient for the place; and then it will be straightened by subtle structuring.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And it is known that the place where it is arched and not divided into two or another that does not occur in the cartilage, just as the whole part of its comparison, then it is felt that it begins from your hour to rectification of it, however, it has reached a posthumous apostema caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it has reached a posthumous apostema caution, then it will leave that for some days until the apostema ceases; and then it will be wrapped according to whatever manner you can of elevation and of ingenium.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And it is known that the restoration of it and the reduction of it is less troublesome than that of the bone in which it occurs, thus cartilage.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then it will be strengthened according to what will come as a remembrance of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is cartilaginous, then it is necessary to extend this broken member of two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And it is your position in which you pause the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member, then you will perform that they return to their ingenium and according to whatever manner you can place them in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware yourself according to your strength that you do not exceed over the patient by your operation of the limb nor lesion; and perform yourself according to your own power that you apply one bone to another as its companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is felt that at that hour you will profitably touch with your hand there, and if sometimes here is another diverse cause, rectify it and wrap it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as many foolish doctors who make veiled ones that make posthumous apostema caution through their operation, or make contrition in the member, just as we have seen that for the operation of their veiled ones.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connect, then equate and decent operation and structure of that member, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about that and make them aware that they should not move it at the time of their vigils and of their sleep, and see its revolution and agitation, and remove its ejection, and remove all its movements with all its virtue; and beware that the position of the member is a position in which the pain is secured, which cause is because when one feels in the disposition of the position of the member or lesion; then it is felt that it permits to move to another disposition of that in which there is no pain; and beware that the position of it is direct and wrapped, so that the member does not experience twisting when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which you should recommend; for you know that the members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small thus like the arm and the finger and the knee, then it is fitting that the wrapping should be with very subtle cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are large thus like the thigh or the leg, it is fitting that in those there should be a strong and hard wrapping, because the strong connection connects the big member and strengthens all parts of the entire structure, so that no stain enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, and make your evacuation of equity, pause the convenient wrapping over that place of the fracture with three or four wrappings according to the member's merit; and strengthen your hand a little in the wrapping.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then see that you have arrived at the superior part above the place of the fracture, and strengthen your mind so that you do not force your structure on the place of the fracture which has strengthened it.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen your wrapping around the place of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure gradually, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other side over the place of the wrapping, and then see that you have the wrappings at the superior part below the fracture; and let your operation be in the structure of the wrapping and in softening of it according to what we have said in the primary wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the turns of the wrapping, whether it's a piece of cloth or a bandage, in which the twisting of the fracture is engaged, if there is twisting; and if not, do not pause at all in any case.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause over the other bandage, and then engage properly on these wrappings, done decently and gently, if in the place there is no inflammation or aposteme of caution, and then pause over that which sits on the aposteme and removes the inflammation; and let it be so for some days; and then you strengthen over the entire structure.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And these are the structures of the marrow of a cane of strong race, and be formed skillfully; or of wood of pine; or of strips of palm; and let each structure be wide according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is fitting that the structure which is placed over that fracture be thicker and stronger a little than the other structures, and the length of the stem according to what is suitable for the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the structures with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then bind from below decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when it is distant from the fracture, it mends the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is fitting that the threads be mediocre in thickness and subtlety, and are of silk; and if the threads are thick, thus as you have seen by the operation of some foolish people pausing the threads of the cord of the tort, and it is a great error, when one cuts the structure without equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not conserve the structure in those waters that you want, and it is not fitting that between one stem and another stem there be less than a digit.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stems to the structure in those places, then pause below those of cloth or Carmena's bandage until it does not cause them harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some veiled fractures are a plague, and they cause disruption in the code, and you will find remembrance in that chapter according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that all broken members are not straightened on the first day; which causes it because the member, when it is large, does not fit to pause over the stems unless after five or seven days, according to your security of advent of cautious aposteme.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the ancient plasterers who restored them, which were placed over fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering as an aid to restoration of fracture, convenient for many complex and major injuries to women and children, because it is about that which does not receive heat nor cold: and it is that you take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you find that thus as it is, except that you cleanse it with the white of egg, and pause the composition of that which does not spread nor subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manipulation for implanting fractures and dislocations: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the remedy for salvaging a thousand grains; one dram of mirra and one dram of aloen; two drams of alochil; all are mixed and stirred in water or album to heal if the complexity of the patient's scalp is scabrous; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quite conveniently, and confers a great remedy.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manipulation for implanting which confers a fracture and torso: recipe of migrach and met of white alta one dram x; of mirra and of aloen one dram v; of acacia one dram vi; of Armenian boil two drams xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All together thrice-clarified in a mortar with great contrition, and twice-distilled, and twice-cooked with water or album of Huou and so administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plaster for joints and separated bones in their places, and sudden pain accident in those and cracks and fractures: take a woolen cloth and soak it in warm oil and wax, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Moreover, this plaster is not effective for restoration, but rather for abscesses, cauterizing and properly expelling pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take flowers of dry fig tree and flowers of wild poppy; mix all together and make a plaster of it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plaster quickly administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution from the remaining abscess: take roots of altlea, chamomile, flowers of violas, flour of peas, all together in a partition. Thrice-clarified and thrice-cooked with wine, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	Moreover, if it is scalded, then confers that with water of colyander or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plaster that is stronger in resolution than the first, when it happens that an abscess persists despite the restoration of the member: take roots of altlea and seeds of lime, and balaustia, and melilot, majorana, flowers of viol, chamomile, all together in a partition; thrice-clarified and thrice-cooked with water of sage or water of two waters or wine, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Moreover, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free text that it should be placed over the trembling member for its restoration, unless a wax cerate is made with wax and oil and no other cause; and he recommends that it should be mixed between grossitude and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Moreover, Gualia has seen that they are placed over the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which it is exsiccate with little warmth, thus as with mirror, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that confers on lesion and pain: take migat, cedars, skins of wild man inscized or penalty of auzel, and altlea, and salt, all together in partitions; thrice-clarified, twice-distilled, and thrice-cooked, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Moreover, the quantity according to which it is necessary that the ligation remains and then it should be dissolved, is that you consider if there is no pain nor swelling nor the bone is broken nor moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there occurs a violent pain or swelling or inflammation at the location, then you should bind or delay it at that hour, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a drap of lime and humid marine sponge, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the location until the swelling and pain are calmed; and then lay it to rest for an hour; and then place over it a woolen cloth submerged in warm oil and wax, or rose oil, and leave it on for nine hours until you are secure of abscesses, and the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain of it is removed.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle structure and small plaster, not too strong for your primary construction, and subtly mix it until it is healthy.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all the accidents are so removed from everything, and you are weary of plaster and structure, then you iterate that as I have done from the beginning of the treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if none of those causes occur to the member that we have mentioned, then do not delay it but rather wait three days or four or five; or seven. and some wet applications all that is left for twenty days according to what appears to you for the dislocation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust it more in the structure of the greatest primary totality, and assist in the engrossing of the patient's food, according to how it is preceded by their reminiscence.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Perhaps you sometimes discover the place of the fracture and extend it more so that it does not close, then you know that the nutrient is prohibited from reaching there; and thus embrocate that water with a decoction of three vegetables that are well-guarded; and do this for three days; and loosen the structure a little, and through this operation correct the member to receive the nutrient, and it will heal more quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Perhaps that is when they make restoring remedies for the fracture of the member another way when it is not restored from the beginning, according to how it closes, and it is restored according to its own natural tendency, which is an error according to their operation, and there is great fear, and if you were a director, you would increase the Antics in their free books and would have worked on that.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them who have done so far, because it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of the fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by percussion of the spine, and the percussion passes through all the bone into the ciphac, which is behind the bone, thus as if it were in the chest, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the spine is divided into some part of the bone, and divides the flesh of it and does not pass beyond the rear of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attraction; and the cause of it is percussion with a blow or fall on stone, and its symptoms are similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating which already approaches the peritoneum which is behind the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture it is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made by fall or by percussion of stone and its symptoms are similar, which makes some layer of the bone enter into the divided parts, and it is made in the concave location thus as it occurs to the roles of eram when it occurs to their percussion and it is divided from their entrance into the divided parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it is made in the bodies of humid bones, thus as if they are heads of fantasy.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And so all these species of fractures are evil, so they are weights thus as if they were separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will find a remedy for all that in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I will recognize all these species of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry into their tents and signs of corrupted flesh that is above them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary species is recognized by this that it is discovered over the bone, and it is cleaned, and limited to its tents, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Perhaps in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you sometimes perceive through the accidents that signify by manifest significance over fear, thus as it is vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of judgment, and syncope, and acute fever, and displacement of the veins and rigor of those, and similarity to their accidents in the major dispositions, if it does not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you sometimes encounter non-concurrent accidents, then you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which cause is because if it has come to you the plague in the beginning as it was a plague and that is in the days of winter, then it covers that you studied in the osteument of the bone within the 14th day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then it covers that you touched or starred the bone within the 7th day, having that which is behind the bone is corrupted by the peritoneum, and that the accidents we have recounted happen.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the peritoneum covering the brain, and it is among divided parts and attraction, then it covers that you inject the comminuted and attracted part, according to what I have recounted to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner possible for you according to the figure of the plague, and that it be easier on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to detect the bone, with blood or apostemic caution, then you oppose yourself to that which covers, and it is that you fill the place of draps infused with wine and rose oil, and make the plague repose until it is seated in the aposteme, and be sure of the flow of blood; and begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is done according to one of two manual operations.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One method is that you insert the bone in an instrument of straight style, and this is its form: Then administer another instrument, slightly longer than that; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then administer more instruments longer than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary to have a variety of different instruments, some of which are longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others, and they are in the rear of the treatment of their extremities, and they are for ironing out or felting.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them to facilitate percussion on the instruments so that it does not hit the head and lead to that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, then it is necessary to perforate in the circuit of the dentition before you administer the instruments with the trolleys, which are called non-deep trolleys.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And it is not called thus because those do not reach the term of the bone to that which is next to it, so that the trolley is rounded at the extremity or margin above that which is below the head of the ague, resembling a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a large number of these trolleys which almost converge on the thickness of each bone, so that it is present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is ague, the quantity in length and breadth being according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of trolleys: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that it pauses the trolley on the bone and revolves it with the ties until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then permute the trolley to another location, and pause because it is between all the tracts the quantity of the grossness of the radius or environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the instruments into the instruments that are between each tract of the bone, and make them more subtle so you can operate on it in the end of levitation, as we have said, until you radiate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause by stirring up the instruments which will be prepared for that, as we have discussed, and with forceps and subtle tools.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you keep all caution so that the instrument does not touch any part of the vertebrae.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus when you have perforated the bone, it will be separated from the vertebrae if it is continued in it, and you will extract it, it is necessary that you raise and equalize it in the asperity of the bone with another instrument similar to an instrument, more imperious than the other instruments.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you find some small parts of the bones and fragments, then take them in a way that is convenient for the instruments; and then cure the wound with liniments and unguents which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is levigation, far from pain, which Galen and others have written about for great usefulness; and this is its sermon: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and placed it below the extremity of this instrument, slow and gentle, which is its form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular part is alone and does not insert any cause, and the ague part is of it in two lengths ahead in length, as we have said; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the vertebrae on the face of the incident ague in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then percute on the instrument of a part with a small hammer until you insert all the bone in a convenient way, as it is revolved, and you will be secure from the panniculus that does not happen in any accident that you fear in no manner; certainly, if the medicant was the most foolish of all homes and the most ignorant of them; assuredly, if he were dormant.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if you find some additional cause annexed to the bone of the panniculus in certain locations of the bone, you will insert it from the extremity of the instrument that lenticular part, and you will deliver it from the convenient way, because it is delivered from its own motion and its pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is absent or removed from the bone is the face of it, and you find in its asperity and subtle fragments, then it is necessary to raise that asperity and radiate those fragments with subtle razors for which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all locations most convenient for them and most direct according to what you perceive in the operation on the broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is necessary that you administer in your reason with which you raise the bone at the beginning the most distant from those razors, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease far from that according to continuity until you reach administering the most tenuous and the most subtle parts of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other small fractures or subtle breaks, you should administer care according to what is lost in order to restore it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is a cause that has not been written about by all those who have studied this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we will write about what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus (abdominal skin) is drawn back when you radiate the bone, then take drap (a type of cloth or dressing) according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the primary dressing so that you can apply it more lightly than before, which does not harm the ciphac (a type of surgical instrument); and then administer the lat (a type of bandage) over it, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has so much only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let it be thus for a day or two until you are sure of the aposteme's caution; and then remove it and administer medicines that are superfluously dry, such as linseed and farina of barley, and powders of lavender and aristology, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make these powdered medicines into a powder to be sprinkled over the wound, just as they are dry; and universally, administer in this total medicine of property that it is what cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your prudence that the wound in your cure is clean; and it should not be in the surdity of ointment nor another; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; because when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and destroys it, and falls upon the patient with a malignant malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it falls upon the ciphac (surgical instrument) of the head, as if it is Mondificat (a type of bone injury) and majorly when the cure of it is misrepresented, and it turns black on its surface; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the patient with accidents that we have mentioned, knowing that it is a pernicious total outcome.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not turn black except from the medicine that is placed underneath, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take a third part of honey and three parts of rose oil. And mix those liquids into a dressing, and then place it over the ciphac; and then cure it with the spices of cure that are convenient until it is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that the nose is not fractured unless two parties are simultaneously broken, or one of those cartilages is veined, because in it there are two bones, because the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not fractured and does not fall to it except with attrition and tortuosity and sinewiness.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parties of it is fractured, then take care to introduce the small finger into the nasal cavity, and that you should bind that fracture deeply within the thin finger indicating, and within the thin finger before, until the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do it thus for you have facilitated, and beware that you do not fall into that your operation over the patient's malady.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper party of the nose, and the finger does not reach to it, then take care that it is equal with the extremity of the radius on which it is slightly thickened.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parties, then you do the same as that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then wait seven or ten days for the rest of the cautious postulate.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the extremity of the nose a small piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one party, or half of two calques, if the fracture is in two parties, and it should be in the thickened calque of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And thus some of the ancient restorers said that the calques were infused in boder, and were permitted for the entire day, but it was not seen by me; however, I have found that the piece is infused in album of huou comfit with powder of moli; and then let the calque be until the bone is firm and the cartilage is indurated.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some veined ones were inserted into the nose, in place of calque, penalty of a goat's horn that is enveloped by cloth of lion's skin; and it should be that you already have the fracture of the nose very vehemently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, make calques.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another veined postulate falls, apply the nose with cerote or cotton stuffed with rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	More serious cases do not respond to topical treatments, then we must burn the affected area with a hot iron before applying powder made of sulfur and alum, and place a poultice on the affected limb, without neglecting the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the nasal bones are fractured in a small crack or so comminuted, then we must dissect around them, and extract them with instruments that fit them; and then suture the wound, and cure it so that it encarnates and consolidates, and apply topical treatments that are convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if the disease affects the teeth, then we must cure it with medicinal waters and administer canal-shaped instruments of lead until complete health is achieved.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is dislocated and the fracture of it is not a disease, consider then if the fracture is only superficial, and not broken in two and curved towards the adjacent teeth, then its treatment is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And so, if the fracture is on the right side, you insert the index finger of your left hand into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and press them against the gums to facilitate the reduction of the fractured teeth to their proper place, and in this way you will equalize the bite of the other side.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both separate parts according to their correct alignment until it is possible to equalize them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if the teeth are dislodged due to disruption, then you must strengthen those which remain with a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and place a poultice on the fractured jaw, and place a double-layered dressing, and a piece of solid tin held by a long bandage around the jaw; and adjust that underneath according to how you have prepared the ligature and so that it is convenient for application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and place food near their bed so they can take it easily.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then you will touch and dislodge it on the third day; and apply rectification to what has been altered of it and apply a poultice made of soft powder, alum, or flour of chamomile, since you have removed the crust from it, and place the poultice on the affected limb.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then add cum sta annex and adjust that poultice over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, so it doesn't dislodge until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time the disease recurs, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and remove that aposteme.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a disease, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or displaced, then you will subtly remove those displacements with instruments that are convenient for removing them.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the disease is narrow, then you will amplify it with a flea-botomy according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those displacements, and none will remain, then you will close the orifice of the disease if it is wide; and if not, place one of the poultices that are convenient for it and encarnate it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the ankle when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the ankle joint is broken in front of the foot, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch each other; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that it touches in its displacements, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is a disease.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a disease, is that you must have two ministers present, so that one holds the injured ankle and the other extends the vein to that affected part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then bind the fracture with tight bandages until it takes its natural shape according to what is convenient, and it is not in a prominent place nor concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is convenient to place a small cloth or wool underneath the patient's bed, and its greatness according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the ankle and bend the foot with your hand until it binds the fracture according to what is convenient.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reduce the extremity of the ankle to its previous parts, because it has been perverted to the prong, then it is convenient that the patient be resupinated on their back, and place a larger cushion under the muscle of one side in greatness.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister takes the patient's muscle to the divided parts below so that the bone of the elbow is elevated and it is in the press in them, and then you straighten the fracture and anoint those ties with.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Perhaps you feel numbness of the elbow and your wrists, then cover what you find there and extract those numbness to facilitate.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you make a precise incision on them with one of the instruments which have been prepared for that, because you had placed under the elbow the instrument that serves the ciphac; and it is an instrument of wood or iron from which this is the shape of it.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a hollow cylinder of which this is the concavity; and its width will be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Perhaps the length of it will be according to what is possible for you in the operation; that there should be two extremities thus, and one extremity should be ample and the other stretched.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the numbness of the bone is large, and you are sure of a cautious postulate, then you adjust the two lips of the wound to a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear a cautious postulate, then you fill the wound with dressing and poultices according to the quantity of the separation of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you fear a cautious postulate, then you put a warm dressing on it and anoint with rose oil and wine, and pause above that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	Perhaps the structure of the bone when it is wounded and separated, is that you put a plaster made of flour from millet in album of egg white, and you pause above the stoppage of the lion, and then you pause the spine below the titillations of it, if you are induced to do so; and then you take a human mate, so that it is not too long, and its width is about one palm or around that; and then you put double poultices above the stoppage and the plaster; and then you take a subtle table stake of which the width is three fingers and similar in length; and then you wrap that in a dressing, and then you wrap that dressing with the stake on the spot above the spot of the fracture; and then you pause human mate thus, and revolve that around the neck of it and below the titillations of it on both sides, and below the titillations of its thigh, and you reduce that throughout all parts, and when the structure of the fracture is reduced to a descent, and it is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And thus, that the stake does not remain stuck to the broken bone; and for this reason you will see the patient every day, because when the ligament is mollified or the stake is already removed, then you straighten it and strengthen the bond.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then you put the patient to sleep on their chest, and you put below the titillations of it, so that they sleep in a small space at night; for thus the helper of it is elevated from the side of that, and therefore the fracture of the elbow is elevated by the elevation of the muscle; or its arm is tied to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless you fear it will settle in an improper place or postulate, until twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then you renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it up to that, and adjust in the structure and restore it and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the elbow is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some vegetables are cooked in some houses which are done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken in its lateral part and does not break except at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when it is broken in its middle part — and it is broken in the middle of its part — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture thus you prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in all manner of engendering which is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then you put above the spot of dust from millet in album of egg white and stoppage of lion; and then you put double poultice dressing; and then you put above it a subtle table stake according to the quantity of the entire shoulder blade or perhaps a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Perhaps if the stake is concave in some of the spots of the shoulder blade, then you anoint that concavity with lion's stoppage, and then you balance the stake according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen below with a long human mate by gentle compression and firmness of the stake until it is not removed from its own place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and all vegetables that are mollified, another vegetable and strengthen it and equalize the stake if it is removed from its own place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And you place the patient on a soft mattress.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The splint is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you know that it is assured that those are bones which were not joined together nor did they dissolve.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the place of the bone's fracture and put a bandage underneath, then you divide it above, and remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the sacred aposteme's furcula, so that it does not become inflamed here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Some feet are broken in the middle of them and that end is twisted; but the extremities of it are moved and communicated.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of it when its middle is broken, it declines to the internal parts and becomes inflamed with great pain, and difficulty in walking, and stumbling, and faintness, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on a soft bed, and a cushion between their hips; and then press upon the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with two pairs of ribs, and subtly intervene in the operation of it and in its equilibrium according to all manner that is possible and that is convenient, until the shape of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a cushion upon the plaster and stopper and a cushion above that of a smooth table or of saffron or of its similar levitation, since you envelop it in a cloth; and then subtly intervene on that over the broken bone so that it is not bruised; and go to the binding according to the retondition of some feet, and strengthen it with decent structure; and then consider the binding at all times, and when it is mollified, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to provoke the dissolution of that corrosion or putrefaction, or pain, or aposteme that becomes inflamed in the place, then you cut and dissect that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what becomes inflamed through that manner of cure; and then return the plaster, if sometimes it is done to that face; and adjust its structure until it is healthy.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in gross places that are next to the spine; and of the extremities of their part from the front do not become inflamed unless through those which are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of it is not hidden from the sensation, because of the inquiry into its conditions.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is thus that it unites the fracture with its conditions according to the possible manner, until it is united as it was, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone in this way, if it is needed for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs declines to the internal parts, then it becomes inflamed with vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that becomes inflamed in one who has pleurisy, and because of this the bone puts forth a velament; and it becomes difficult to breathe, and stumbling, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And now the Antiques are ingenious in that with many ingenious remedies.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them it is said: it is good that you apply remedies to the patient that induce inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the anterior parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We have avoided this because it is not the cause of generating aposteme unless it becomes inflamed; and if it has become inflamed, then it helps towards that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that it should be placed under the windows and then sucked with a strong force; and it is similar to reasoning, but meanwhile I think that the window attracts the superfluities to the place due to debilitation.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: it is good that the place should be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that it is the binding that envelops it according to retondition; and then the patient should be cured with a cure of pleurisy through diet and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes vehement constriction to the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth a velament with puncture leading, I think about the patient, then it is good that we place upon the place, uncovering the fractured rib, and then pause above that instrument which preserves the cipher, the remembrance of which precedes, and that we facilitate the bone, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with coziding, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if you encounter an acute abscess, then touch and gently press the swollen area with your fingers, and stop there to heal the patient's affliction in that place.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	He should be placed on his back on the bed where he sleeps, until he is healthy.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some vertebral fractures are hidden, and it is necessary to adjust them carefully, and similarly the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when you encounter some of these cases and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider this: because sometimes the most swollen and stupefied and deadened limbs cannot be moved or extended or strengthened, and when they are constricted, they have numbness or piercing pain, then you know that they are not healed, and in these conditions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you find that they are numb and feel constricted in the fingers and punctured, then you know that the core of the bone is saved and that the patient's wounds will be cured.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to this and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they are already paralyzed, it means that what happened in the marrow has occurred, and then when you sit on their back, there is evacuation and egestion according to their will, and some hidden things are placed on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not struggle in their cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if you do not encounter any of these causes, the cause is worse and more obscure.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure of it is that you perform a sedation on the abscessed vertebrae with a hot iron sole, or with mugwort steam; pause on that day until the abscessed vertebrae are sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then pause with one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and strengthen around that limb; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side where they feel pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter the separation of the vertebrae or some cause that has already been separated from it, then it is necessary to sew up the wound and to adjust the two lips of the wound, with a suture if it is large; and then cure that encarnated wound of the joints, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the vertebrae of the spine are broken, and it is the end of the coccyx, then it is necessary that you introduce the finger of your left hand into the anus, and that you adjust the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible for second alignment; and then pause on the plaster and staple, if you need those, and then strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken vertebrae in it, then you feel on that, and remove it, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the narrowness (or stricture).
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the narrownesses are easily broken, and if they break, then the fracture of theirs is not only communication in the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the affected parts; and it encounters the patient's pain in the place and puncture, and the limb is stupefied when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is on the fracture which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is in the extremity of it alone, then you adjust it according to what appears to you as possible for equal adjustment until it is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the loin or already declines to the lower parts, then you make the patient sit on their back ventre until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have adjusted it, pause on the plaster, and then pause on that staple of wood or of bone, and strengthen by stricture over which there is no fear of puncture of fracture nor movement of the staple.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And adjust the concavity to that which fills it until it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if you encounter an abscessed vertebrae, then cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscessed vertebrae is sedated, and pause on that which sits according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus as it is necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you find them in the vertebrae or they are communicated, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the adjutator (or helper).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutator is that which is between the rib and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which you take first as a thick plaster according to this method:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And you will find them in two extreme ligaments, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a chair; and then you will place the broken arm straight over the inner hollow of the thigh, until it reaches the knuckle of their hand in the same location where the curvature of the thigh is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it above some heavy cause, or the master extends that to the divided parts below; and then the doctor will know that the fracture is in the most sensitive places, until the fracture returns according to its natural course.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other manner is that the patient is resupinated on their back and suspended by the hand from the neck, and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in their hands; and the other holds the pus below them; and almost all of them extend to their divided part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you stretch over the fracture in one ligament and over that in another ligament, and almost all of the two ministers extend to their two divided parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And then if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it happens that half of the ligament is placed over the knuckle and the other below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow, then it happens that the ligament is placed over that place and over that elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	That will facilitate and ease the treatment, and then it will be applied according to what happens and is applied for good application, then stretch that if you do not encounter any opposing abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if you encounter opposing abscess, then loosen the structure until the seventh day, and pause on the lane of the wounded skin in seven agreements and oils rosated until the abscess settles, and then you stretch that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the manner of stretching that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then you pause enveloping with new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that adjuster, and place your hand opened over the thigh muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And pause the cloth and stretch over the adjuster the arm so that the arm is in a stable place, if it doesn't prohibit anything from some cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stabilizers.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture that stabilizer which is more laden and stronger than the other stabilizers; and pause between each stabilizer the width of the finger, and let the length of the stabilizers be according to the fracture in addition to three fingers of the entire part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then stretch over the stabilizers with the structure which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your structure over the place of the fracture should be more straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture has been well-aligned, the structure will be smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And then if you observe the situation of the stabilizers and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its usual situation, then you do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear opposing abscess, then loosen the structure and stabilizers until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it doesn't become inflamed or swollen in the place of pruning or inflammation; or it is prohibited to let the food reach the member by disposition of superfluous structure; and thus rectify all according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's rest be on their back, and their most sensitive places be above the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause on the adjuster full of woolen wrapping, and consider in all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed nor dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, thus rectify all with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the food of the patient according to the order which we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is subtle at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then it happens that you increase the food of them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Since the custom of the adjuster and of their leg is that they are strengthened in 40 days; and then it happens that they are loosened and administered baths and medicated with ointments which rectify those.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is badly treated, then you do not loosen that ligament and stabilizers until a month or until two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm-bones; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the radius bone, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small bone, from the part below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if you have broken the larger or smaller fontanelle, or if you have broken it in several places.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fontanelle is broken below, then its restoration is more difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fontanelle of the patient's thigh is broken, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small fontanelle below, then it is convenient for the doctor to delay its restoration, so that a small extension can be facilitated until it is fully healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large fontanelle is what is broken, then it is necessary to apply a more violent extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both fontanelles are broken at the same time, then it is necessary that you make the extraction even stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary that you make the shape of the hand conform to the restoration of it and the extended extension over a cushion, and let the pulse of the hand be at the upper parts below, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger be lower than the other fingers, and the malady be seated on an inclined chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion underneath it in its elevation or declivity, so that the malady does not encounter trouble.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then extend the minister's arm from the upper part downwards to the right hand or left, and another minister extends similarly from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor heals the bone until it returns to its best shape that it can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there are splinters, then you will perforate all the flesh in the right place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears that the splinter is separated and you hold the codeine and it is not in your expectation for its restoration, then you finish over it and remove it according to the manner which we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is in a plague, you have already done this at that singular chapter, and therefore take the care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if you find an aposteme at the beginning of your restoration, then line up a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and be more subtle between speculation and subtlety, and stretch the cloth over it in strict structure until the aposteme is calmed; and then remove the cerate and apply an emplaster prepared from powder of mulberry on clay of hooves, and then apply steel; and let the steel be that which is applied over that fracture firmly and strongly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you will know that the name of the steels of the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one fontanelle or in two fontanelles at the same time.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply your structure over the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when it will be the extraction to the upper parts above the fracture or to the lower parts below it, apply the structure a little more slowly according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be very humid, and not dry nor rough, and the thread with which it is stretched should be of its own proper middle ground between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament to be at rest for some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if you find some cause for which correction is necessary, as we previously mentioned what happens to the limb, and then it is necessary that you immerse the limb in warm water until the correction ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb not constricted until it rests, and then return the structure.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extraction is already mollified and the bone is already reformed and resembles those, then correct all that with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of structure, because then it is necessary that you mollify it a little and leave it for some days until it runs towards the nourishment, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the malady does not find any cause among those that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to delay until about 20 days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the hand of the malady is suspended by its virtue of agitated movements, and make it sleep on its two sides.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you will know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or if it is strongly restored in twenty-eight days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the phalanges of the hand and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You will know that in the phalanges of the hand and fingers, there are often fractures, and they do not reach their place unless with very gentle and well-guided movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when it reaches the hand fracture or attrition, then it is necessary that the malady follows an inclined path and descends from above according to equality, and then place the hand of it on that extension.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then extend the minister outward to stretch out the bent bones in the ankle joint, so that they may be well-contracted and aligned.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then cover the area with a plaster and stopper, if there is no abscessed aposteme to be cauterized; and then apply a star-shaped dressing underneath according to the size of the area, and you have already enveloped it in a cloth of linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	Perhaps the binding is in the divisions of the fingers of the palm, and then it seems like a bandage of cloth, and command the patient to stretch that with their bound palm; then it will be strengthened with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And there is the star-shaped dressing on the heart in the cloth where it is elevated, so that the body can be applied to the palm; and stretch that according to how much it covers.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Perhaps the fracture is in the divisions of the forearm, then cover that with a star-shaped dressing underneath and another on the divided part below in the palm, so that the hand can be elevated and straightened; and then apply the splint, thus as the hand is revolved back into its proper alignment between the fingers and the wrist.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture is in the knuckle of the fingers, then if it is a fingerless hand, it will be aligned according to how much it covers and then strengthened in the palm and if you want, place a small straight splint per so that the fracture is elevated and not misplaced.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Perhaps the fracture is in other fingers, thus as in that of the middle location, or in the index finger, or in the ring finger, then it will be aligned and bound to the finger itself; or all the bindings will continue according to continuity, and it is better; or place above a small star-shaped dressing, thus as we have said about the fingers.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and then apply that, the disposition of abscessed aposteme to be cauterized and opposed — in the entire operation — to what covers when there is some cause among those, according to how the narration of it is iterated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fractures of the bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the hip joint, which are very fragile, are broken and declared according to the sensation, as they are converted into the division above and the pus that is below.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done thus, that one bandage is strengthened over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then extend the minister to stretch out the entire bandage to its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle location of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Perhaps it is proper to reach the root of the hip joint, then the bandage will be placed from above to the part of the perineum, so that the extension takes hold in them, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is proper to above, then make the bandage from above, and let the extension be to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the ankle joint aligns the bone in both its natural positions into which it reduces according to the natural semblance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then cover that with a plaster and splint, if there is no abscessed aposteme in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	Perhaps if there is an abscess in the aposteme, then leave it alone for some days until the cauterized abscess has subsided, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The splinting of it should be done thus: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and double that two or three times, and remove the superfluous part; and then wrap the leg so that it reaches to the ankle and the root of the hip joint.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long fillet between the hip joint and the leg proper from above to the parts below, and wrap the extremities of the fillet around the part just below the two joints, and then revolve over the leg and hip joint what is superfluous of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place above the hip joint in the location of that fracture thus, and place one star-shaped dressing over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill in the voids between the leg and the hip joint with many cloths, so that the structure is consolidated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong splinting from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you have thus bound the location of the fracture with a bandage, your splinting will be less and lighter and more flexible.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the fillet to the parts below until they reach the hollow of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the star-shaped dressings on the other part so that the bandage is not removed from its proper location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the structure over that, so that it does not reach the corroding member nor cauterized aposteme nor inflammation and seems similar to those; and if there is some cause among those, then cut away from the dislocation of it, and rectify what reaches all around, according to how we have said many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is affected by the weight of the bone itself, then take care to unload it according to what is possible for you; and if not, place something underneath it and remove that which has preceded the memory of the pain.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some weakened veins are strengthened by this fracture of the thigh or other joints that are adjusted to them, thus we have said in the adjunct and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Perhaps in the restoration of it, in such a way that no accidents occur to the patient's crippled condition; and if it is restored alone, or another joint that should be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that the crippled one be tested at all times.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade of the hand.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that a fracture of the shoulder blade of the hand is difficult to heal, and more accidents occur to the weakened muscles and tendons.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If it occurs to the fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and that is a wound or several wounds, and about that all this has been stated according to the opinion.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is also that which is reunited, that which has been broken off from its parts, with the digits put together so that it can be added and conjoined as much as possible for equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then pause with the plaster and place it on that round stool, if you need it; and strengthen below with a structure according to what is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, thus as it is postulated with caution and similarity to those in which they oppose all accidents in what is convenient for the patient's health.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is large, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and is named fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it occurs to certain species of fracture that occur to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason it is made restoration of it thus as restoration of the arm union, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, the leg is converted into the anterior parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is broken, you will find those symptoms, and it is from those causes that are not easily diminished.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and equilibrium and ligamentation of the muscles according to that union.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Perhaps it is better, if the fracture of the leg has many weakened muscles, that the extension should be milder and less frequent, and it will help your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you unite the bones and complete all the time of operation, then you will take steps to straighten the foot from the place where the causes that were paused in solitude, and so you will make an examination of the branches of the palm; likewise from those to which there is small gout, and not be one of the manual ones, and it should be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the hand up to the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop it with a certain cloth in two envelopments according to the length of it, and place one on the part of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and so from the hand up to the base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two bones in three places of the extremities and at the middle place, because in this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left parts, and it will be in good station.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now administer a wooden board according to the length of the leg; and it should be placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is better that you do this in fracture, and when you have that wound properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider in each day the leg and study it for further study, and you will guard yourself from postulation and inflammation or other similar causes; and when some cause of those occurs, then pause and apply to the patient what is good for their health.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not suffer a complete fracture; however, the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fractures, and they do not occur to them except with great violence in the midst of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot undergo fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient pauses their foot on the prepared earth thus as a support.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then stop the one foot above that which is elevated by those bones, and then tighten them, and press, and bend them inward so they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply an plaster and stop it from below, and place the belly of the foot on a small table to which two wooden legs are attached.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that part of the foot in its natural structure, since you have enveloped it with cloths and other causes of which they are worthy.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when it passes three or four days, then you will release the bandage, because you will find the bones set, or reunited, or relocated, and the operation on those is thus successfully concluded.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	Maybe some of these are reunited, then restore them, and bind them thus as you are and reassemble the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then stop the reunited finger in its natural length, and let it be slightly bent; and then place the foot on this table which you have recomended, and strengthen that part of the foot in its natural structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	Maybe that which is reunited by the bones is two or three or more, then you stop on each finger in its natural quantity enveloped in a lion's cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the legs of the table for the belly of the foot to have good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which I have told you in the other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and stop yourself from every accident that may occur.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the knee of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the wound of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the knee of the woman is broken, then make that cease in that wounded place, and then bend it towards the division of the two in a small way, and let it be held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the nurse will hold the knee together, and make it like her own knee; and then the woman will be comforted, and lift the back of her little by little, because all that is forgotten returns until it is before the division of the knee like her own and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then apply poultices on the back of her, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cot with facility and apply urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return to the first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or around them, because that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an egg of ostrich and strengthen over the thigh of her a tube of cane; and insert the whole bladder into her knee, and then blow into the tube with great virtue until the bladder is inflated inside the knee, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be filled with cot and stand for some days according to what we have recommended, until she is healthy.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of man or woman is broken, then minister in the restoration and healing of it according to what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is direct is not hidden in these nearby fractures, and little happens, mainly to those who have some study and use and understand my free book; because this fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via direct restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore I finish.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	Maybe in the wound of the man when it is broken, take a piece of elm tree, and put the wound in that; and then stop over it with an enveloping cloth, and let it be enveloped, and then let it be laid down for three days or around them, and let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are wounded by a blow.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for those who suffer from fracture by a blow, and mainly if the bone is large like the bone of the hip or of the adjuster, or similar to that, that you take care and make flexible as much as possible, so the conditions of flexibility testify to you or demonstrate thus as we have said before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the blow flows with blood, then it is necessary that you take care of retention of it in such a way that you sprinkle over the injured place, if there is no other cause present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if there is no abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Maybe if there is abscess caution, then you delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	Maybe if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered codena, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce that and bind it with your most facilitating and least extended extensions.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mostly if you don't extend it to you prepared and the equality of the arm in the muscles more, then you return that arm to its joint; and it is a straight instrument, the length of which is seven or eight inches and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take four or three according to the quantity that indicates to him in the cure of all kinds of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be rounded, and it should be in a small groove so that it is not doubled over itself during the operation hour.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be of acute extremity where the margin is in the six extremities; and it should be the underside of it with a large tendon stretching, and from its middle to the divided parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small blade.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it is necessary that the extremity of the acute elevated edge be raised above the prominent bone extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and it should be inserted into some equality of joint.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then it is necessary to insert the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the extremity of the broken bone is subtle, and does not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot return the bone to its entirety as we have recommended, then insert it in that part which is most convenient for the incisions, or it will be one of the saws in some manner possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then scrape off what remains on the bone of roughness and of small, delicate scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is returned, and then you reduce the pain of the violent throbbing, then you will know that the bone has not been returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer with the patient for great comfort.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed your restoration which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in six stipatic black draps, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause on the cerous plague or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not induce putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer staples at the hour of the completion of the bone restoration, and uncover the plague in this way that you insert the tube with forceps and uses of envelopments according to the quantity of the plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And beware that you do not strengthen the plague in the fracture, because many times it happens that foolish doctors make them, and they cause to occur on the wounded limbs mortal or corroding wounds, thus it is sanity.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the structure of the limb relaxes, softens, differs from the structure of the other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the plague is great or is a bad wound, and you fear about those evil accidents worse than those which we have recommended, and it throbs with pain in the place, then it does not matter that you pause on those staples, but rather do according to that envelopment of hard draps in place of staples and strengthen them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when one or two days have passed since the plague began to form a crust, then you remove from underneath the drap which you had placed on it six times, and administer heat, injecting those of our custom that we medicate the plagues, thus as we inject tetrafarmacon and similarly to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the plague every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction of the bone is facilitated from the parts below.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes many days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from the crust, then you will know that here are signs of small ulcers because it is necessary to inquire into the plague in a tentative manner.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those signs, those that are separated remain and extract, those that from them are not separated and put the member in pain, therefore it is necessary to insert them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you hasten to the plague with suction or evacuation, it is stimulations, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary that you pause at one of those which is convenient for him in the cure of which there is a preceding narration in the seventh chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that which is necessary to state my best sermon and you make present your effort: when the bone is well-trimmed, it shines upon the member just as the bone of the thigh and of the helper and similarly to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction from it, nor the extraction from it because many times it hastens for that death; having thus until you purify, because strong will be your fall if you prepare for 20 days or XXX. And when you treat the wound if you have seen it, and if it does not heal, then.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Soft tissues are affected by this swelling in the vicinity of a fracture's healing, and especially since it is close to the joints, and it is obstructed by the shape of the limb; and it strongly prohibits the limb from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer in those medicines that have been stipated thus, such as aloes, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar to those; in this way you take some or all of them, and mix them together so they are stipated, or with album of water, or with vi aggre, and apply it on the swelling in a stop, and constrict them over it for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let it remain undisturbed for several days; and then dissolve it and apply another, until the swelling is reduced; or stretch over that layer of lead decently, because lead has the property of reducing all that which is inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a stone and is hardened, it is necessary to provoke an abscess there, and then divide it through the upper part of the limb, and incise the superfluous and eminent, or cut away that with some resolve until it is reduced; and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then returned to its subtle and free natural movement.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of bone is restored, and then returned to its subtle and free natural movement, it is not done so except for several causes: one of which is the multitude of solutions of the ligament and of the bonding that does not cover according to its nature; or due to superfluous strictness of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to a multitude of excessive embrocations; or due to superfluous movement not at its proper time; or due to scarcity of blood in the body of the patient and weakness of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths; and apply gauge and bandages over them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply a poultice over the limb, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continues to embrocate it with water and tepid warmth, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored twistedly and prohibit the operation of their own which is natural.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the limb already restored, then healing occurs from twistedness and eminence to the broken bone and swelling, and it is because of the faulty formation of the limb, but meanwhile the limb does not prohibit its natural operation, then it does not occur that you receive the word of him who existed before that limb was newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But already many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth; and this operation is very detestable, producing great fear in the sign of which is mortality.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the paralysis and swelling are recent, then it happens that they are embrocated with warm water in which they gather softening herbs, such as those of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and be made into an emplaster with mollifying emplastering thus, as well as dyallaquilon is well made; or that a mucilage of root of altea is taken and is mixed with gray gauze or oil of cypress, and is emplastered thereon; or that fat figs are applied and are bandaged on the columns of the limbs, and similar to those of the medicines which are named as permanent consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some vertebrates are dissolved in steady friction of the ligature which is in the most humid places, and movement of the limb is administered at all hours to all parts.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the twistedness has already gone deep and is hardened and converted into a stone and provoked necessity for treatment with iron, then it happens that the pus is cleansed from above and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and it is incised so that superfluous swelling of that metacarpal is cut away with subtle incisions, and facilitated administration is made in that which is solicited and studied.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the sermon on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from their natural place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the limb is altered, and brings great pains and serious lesions to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes apostematous and strongly inflamed, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And if you do not cover yourself so that you are not touched or stood upon at the time of the disease, because many weakened muscles come to bring about spasms and pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Maybe when it happens, then cover yourself with the flannel of the patient, and place it under so that you can restore the disease; and place the member in warm water and oil, and then reduce it to make it more comfortable.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member is treated with water of which the memory will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body then descending to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 23.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So the two lower jawbones are dislocated if they do not align; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places with little movement, and so slightly mollified; or they are fully dislocated and completed, until they are mollified at the joint area, so that saliva flows from the patient and cannot hold it nor close their mouth, and their tongue is enveloped in its speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	Maybe when the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major arrangements it returns to itself for a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	Maybe if the dislocation is full and complete, then cover that a reduction of it should be administered immediately, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister should hold the head of the patient, and in the meantime the doctor puts his fingers on one side in the hollow of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he puts both fingers at the same time, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are placed beneath them to hold them steady; and he commands the patient to release their jaws and free themselves from any part; and the doctor holds the jaw and pushes it back into place until it returns to its proper location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and even more so if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made easier and does not delay the reduction of both completely, thus as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they return and are in their place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not mollified, then put a poultice of warm cerate on it, and make it with wax and oil rosated; and place it to facilitate the most comfortable positioning.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head should be steady between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left side; and do not force them to chew anything strong; having taken a gentle diet, forbidden to eat lion, until when the pains are removed and the jaws are numb, then they can have what they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered easily, and do not trouble about the perception of the mouth unless eating and drinking and citation, until the jaw is numb and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any hour and do not convert to their proper places, then many weakened muscles happen suddenly with fever and constant sweat, and the strength is altered in the patient's stomach, and the strength and vomits pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is pernicious; and many weakened muscles die to the one who suddenly happens this in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The ankle is not dislocated from the foot beneath due to its continuity with the foot; and some weakened muscles are dislocated to the front part, and that is declared by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then bind the area with your palm in strong binding, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then put a poultice on that emplaster and apply powders to strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Maybe the extremity of the one who is wounded and is continuous with it, is not dislocated on any day; then cover that it should be reduced and reset according to what we have said and according to your preparation.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then put a poultice on that emplaster, and powders, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its proper place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the top to the bottom.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it should be displaced at the top of the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not displaced at the back parts for the sake of the shoulder; and it is not displaced at the front parts because of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	It is mainly displaced and beforehand examined at the lower parts of the little finger, and it is mainly in those where the flesh is scarce, it is lightly displaced; but in those where the flesh is abundant, it is examined with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And strong percussion accidents occur at some homes unexpectedly, and the patient's muscle is inflamed with a hot apostem, and it is touched for that which has already been displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then take care that you press inside what is above the patient's body, and then proceed with their cure.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is recognized the dislocation of the patient when it is at the lower parts of the little finger; so that you distinguish between the displaced muscle and the healthy one, because you find among them manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and below the little finger's joint, just as if an egg, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its natural position, nor can they do it with every movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is displaced from the foot or ankle, and then you find a clear joint, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the doctor raises the patient's hand to the upper parts; and then places the fingers under the little finger, and raises the joint with strength in its natural place, and the doctor raises the patient's hand, and extends it upwards; and then pauses it below so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return for what we have said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurs, many days, then take care that the patient be bathed in warm water and be given an embrocation that softens and loosens, just as if it were a counter-irritant of fenugrec, and melillot in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is placed supine on their back and is paused below the little finger, waiting for it to be situated between levitation and stricture, and then the doctor places the talon on the spine, and raises the head of the muscle with a vertebra, and releases the patient's hand so that it is not bent at the lower parts, and another doctor holds the head of the patient, so that it is not bent at the lower parts, because then it will return to its natural place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make an effort to present a home where the patient is placed longer than usual, and it is on the side of the latz, and insert the natural muscle below the little finger of the patient and raise the little finger to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another doctor pulls the patient's hand from the lower parts of their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is weak, then take care that I have another cause suspended, so that you alleviate that, because the dislocation returns soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this way: and it is fixed on the ground a long wooden beam of which the head is rounded in shape, just like a mortar's pestle, that is neither large nor subtle, and then placed below the patient; because when placed above the head of the beam, the drapes lean on it, and the patient is standing according to the length of the beam, and then extended the hand to the lower parts of the other side; and the body is extended from the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its natural place with velocity.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a beam of the quantity of which the length is two arms, and the width of that is four fingers, and the thickness of it is adjusted on the thumb's joint according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place on the rounded head some light drapes so that the beam does not harm the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place below the little finger of the patient, and extend the hand or arm over the beam until the lower parts, and tie the beam to the adjacent area and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a scale of steps according to the width, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the other body is suspended from the other side, because the joint enters soon.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is complete according to whatever manner that is possible for you, and then take care that you place below the little finger of the spine in a quantity of equal amount; and then prepare an emplaster made from powder of molybdenum and egg white on all the muscles, just as if it were revolved above, and then strengthen below the little finger with decent stricture; and the ligament is revolved over the emplaster, and the patient's hand is attached to their neck, and it is released, and the patient's hand should not be bent for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	It seems that I should be healing the patient's food a little, until the member is comforted, because it is more pleasing to their health.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the food should be given more frequently or it is exercised with a movement; and thus if it is strengthened and not made soft, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	Maybe if the joint is dislocated often due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it is necessary that in that case a cautery be administered in three tracts, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and the ligament and joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and structure are reduced on some affected areas, and it is not strengthened and cannot be elevated to those parts above, then you will know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already inflamed or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint at no time will be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done from the chest and the shoulder or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension on the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another structure should be administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it affects the healing of the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses many affected areas until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, especially from the front part to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden because you fall under the weight or under the touch according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, that is clearly declared, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the surrounding muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary that the hips be reduced, and the dislocation is reduced as soon as possible before it comes to a chronic apostema, because if it comes to a chronic apostema, difficult is the reduction of it, and hardly is it healed entirely; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many affected areas are dying from that mortally.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that its hand should be extended with two hands, and its arm should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are placed over the hip and below it, and the fingers of its own hands envelop the joint, or at the base of its palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	Maybe if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus that it bends the hand with its own hand, until it strikes the hip at the base of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vigorous extension and very strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same position with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then it should be revolved in all parts, because it is enveloped with a double layer of cloth over its hand, or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, until that oil is applied for it to be those causes that help in lubricating the joint and facilitating; and then he envelops the joint with a vigorous push until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of it is that it should be placed on that plaster in which it is stipulated and excruciated with album of egg white, and it is extended in a descending structure, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is dissolved; and thus if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you dissolve the ligament of it and leave it like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you iterate the plaster and ligament, and leave it like that for several days until it is extended; and then dissolve it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Maybe if it affects the gravity towards the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidification in many ways and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or pause on the alleviated joint, so it is massaged with gentle motion; and then it is bound, and leave it like that on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and place it in many ways; and when it dries, then you scrub the joint with tempered friction, and then iterate over that alleviated one, so it is rounded with gentle motion, once, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in an instrument of many ways, until it is smooth.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want to, stop above that humid and scalded wound with a bandage and tighten it strongly over that; and make some evacuations, because that is humid and returns to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	About the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder dislocation of the hand sometimes happens, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and on the contrary it is more difficult than other joints, but above all it is necessary that there be velocity in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, provided that the place is well prepared or that it does not become inflamed afterwards.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the doctor extends their hand from that, and the doctor places their hand or their palm near the joint, and presses it inwards until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Moreover, it is necessary that it be considered if the palm has been placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places their back against a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is above the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that person should be inwardly bent over the table, so that the doctor's hand can grasp it near the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And then if it returns quickly, that's good; and if not, then strengthen that bandage immediately to prevent inflammation and let it be; and do not touch it, because if not, you will not suffer nor will you be able to put your hand on the reduction of it until several days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Moreover, the Roman joint is according to its twistedness; and do not notice any cause in the patient, but rather that the hand is weakened and cannot hold anything; then you know that the nerves are numb or paralyzed, and then it is not possible to put anything on it unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the treatment of it and to fortify its strength.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the shoulder is returned, then stop above the bandage which we have recommended, and let it be strengthened and tightened for five days; and then it should be loosened and let go, and the patient's hand should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Moreover, if the movement of it is painful and causes discomfort in some part, then apply a warm compress and make some evacuations, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	About the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some evacuations are necessary to completely dislocate the toes.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a toe is dislocated from its place on the back of the palm or on the belly of it, then hold the toe and press the dislocation of it with the tied fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in its proper place on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bind it according to the narration, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise its movement, and bind it at night; and do this for some days until it is strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similarly to this, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and bind it to that part and do this first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	About the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens that one of the vertebrae of the back or neck is completely dislocated, and several vertebrae are moved from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death awaits the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And it is evident that the effort of the patient is beyond their strength, and they cannot retain it; and many evacuations are needed to weaken some members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebra is moved from its place, because many evacuations are necessary to move it and many evacuations are made for the movement of that in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that is moved to the back parts and is called luxation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Moreover, the treatment of it is that then you consider if the luxation occurs from weakness, because then in that case there is no cure nor healing at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Moreover, in that which is seen through experimentation or percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients revealed the methods of treatment in a verbose sermon, from which the most returns to profit; but you have already abbreviated it from that from which I have little excuse for the trope of it, by my own proximity to the intention of my own exposition, in which I have expounded and formed various instruments of that, with which I will show this and expand on it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in luxation which occurs from the part below the foot, there is no healing nor cure for it; and similarly in that which is done to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those it is not cured unless it occurs on the back properly, where I recommend it.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	It is that the patient should be extended on their face over a soft mattress near a wall, and should be extended with a moderate straightening so that the chest of the patient is not hindered.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stick, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed around the patient's head, and another stick in the air holding the feet of the patient on the other side of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the stick, and it is not fixed in a trench; and another minister holds the other according to that same form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap a bandage around the patient's head and tighten the small ligatures firmly; and extend the extremity of the ligature to the stick which holds the patient's head, and tie it there; and place the other ligature on their hips, at the groins of the patient, and tie the legs of the patient; and adjust all the ligatures and tie them to the other stick which holds the patient's feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should carefully extend the ligature to the partition of the stick, and do not remove the two sticks and the ligatures from their proper places where they are fixed, but rather leave them firm as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine for strengthening until it returns, or places them on that one table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this method, then take a table of which the width or length is in the air three hand-breadths, and dig into the wall where we have said that it is near the patient a place where the extremity of the table enters.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the flat surface of the table on the spine, and the doctor places their feet on the other extremity, and stretch it well until the spine is straightened and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, take a turn which has been turned around in the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground near the patient's head at the back of the bed two sticks, the length of which is one arm, and near the patient's head at the back of the bed again two sticks; and let the length be between each stick a palm, and already it has been done in each stick through which the turn is made, and each should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it is not moved.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round stick in which the turn is made, and let it be turned around in the two tracks of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the extremity of it there is a track in which the stick is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is turned around; and in the two other sticks it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligatures that have been stretched on the chest of the patient in the stick which holds the head of the patient, and the ligatures that have been stretched on their thighs in the turn which holds their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then there is a turn and a minister who holds the turn with their hand, and the doctor straightens the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then because the spine has returned, and the place is straightened, then it is necessary to apply a plaster cast of egg white on the affected area, and then stop; and then place on the cast a flat surface of a table of which the width is three fingers or around that, and the length of it is as much as takes up the space of the gibosity, and on the partition of the spine thus.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be tied with the ligature which we have said, and use the patient's subtle nutrition until they are healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any inflammation at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines which mollify and soothe be administered on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it has been administered in that place a layer of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some weakened points occur in the back of the spine of the two, and it is customary for that dislocation; and it is that bone which has already been injured so that it does not happen to be made worse by this medicine, because it will make your condition worse, and you will accelerate death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the Cure of a Dislocated Hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not come together unless there is dislocation only, and it does not occur to those which occur in the other small joints with movement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the forward parts, or to the inward parts, or to the backward parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the inward parts or to the backward parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	For the indication of dislocation from the parts that are fourth, when you adjust the leg of the healthy thigh to the unhealthy one, it is more lengthy and more evident than the healthy one, and the unhealthy leg cannot double its step because of the tongue-like apostema, and it is the place where the tongue-like apostema is cauterized with a hot iron, so that the end of the thigh is already pervaded here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of that which falls into dislocation is in the forefront parts, it is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of that which falls into dislocation in the anterior parts is because the leg is expanded according to its compliment, but meanwhile it does not double that step because of the pain that is in the tongue-like part, and if it is perforated to walk and cannot stand on that, the urine of it is retained and the knee of it is apostematous, and the walking of it is upon the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of that which falls into dislocation in the posterior parts is that it does not expand the tongue-like part, nor can it double that step which doubles the knee, and the leg of it is shorter than the other, and the knee is mollified, and the end of the thigh is at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been anticipated with that which you have administered reduction to it and arranged according to its disposition, then it is not in that complete cure; and therefore there cannot be a postponement of the process.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Moreover in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should hurry to restore the joint and extend it to the posterior and anterior parts, and likewise to the right and left, because strongly it returns and does not indicate another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the part below, or with its own hands, or with a bandage which is tied over the tongue-like part; and another minister extends the hand of that which is above, so that it touches the lower parts with its fingers; and you hold strongly on the edge of the thigh, and have another minister who stretches the extremity of the edge.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is an extension of it or from the posterior part to the angle at the part of the hip, or from the posterior part to the part of the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all those in one go, until the patient is elevated above the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that which we spoke of in terms of its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the posterior parts, it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on the ground beside; and then pause the edges on the edge of the thigh at that place which is between the end of the thigh and the place below the knee; and then extend the edge from the part of the angle to the further back part of the hip.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister takes the arms of it, and holds the large place of the unhealthy thigh and extends to the anterior parts for violent extension, because that returns to its original place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of the easiest cure in which this member is reduced more than the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Moreover if it is excused from you and does not obey the entrance to this species of cure at all, then it is necessary that the two feet of the unhealthy person be tied together strongly, lightly, above both ankles and both tongue-like parts.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And it is the length of each one of its part by the quantity of four fingers, and it is the unhealthy leg extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the unhealthy person is suspended above the top of the beam, and it is in the harness; and it is the length of it from the ground a quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to move the end of the thigh, and it is suspended with the unhealthy person another youth, and the other youth moves the thigh strongly in an empirical manner, because the joint returns to its original place with velocity.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	Moreover in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the anterior part, it is necessary that the unhealthy person lies on a pillow according to what we have recommended in the preceding chapter; and it is strengthened the edge over the unhealthy leg properly and over its foot.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two beams are placed, one at the foot of it, and the other at the end; and then two adjusted beams are placed on the middle of the joint fixed above which the humid towels are enveloped, so that the unhealthy person is not damaged because the beam is between the thighs of it, so that the extension to the lower parts is not attracted.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends to their part, and the doctor puts their hand in the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey the reflection, it will be great; and if not, pause diligently over that and thus we have said in gobbledygation for that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Maybe it is necessary to place the patient's jaw on the soft cushions later.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then it is necessary that the leg be extended gently, and it is according to this narrative method about pus; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the loin of the patient, and then touches with the other hand, and in this way stops the extension to the anterior parts below the part of the knee.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the anterior parts below, and it is elevated above the earth; having been placed on a hard surface, thus as we have said, if the joint of the patient is dislocated to the anterior parts, according to what we have said about the alignment of the patient on two stools; and it is above their face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no danger.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary that compression be administered on the table above the area where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, since the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient's leg expands and excuses, then you know that the limb is returned as it should be — and then you adjust both hips and place a bandage and extend to the bend so that the joint is not moved in any part; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then release the ligament and bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those joints in agreement, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply it, and extend it according to your primary structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release it, and make it delay in walking about for some days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the cure of dislocation of the knee.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The knee is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated to the anterior parts, and to the posterior parts, and sometimes below to the posterior parts; and to the anterior parts it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that it commands the patient to apply their leg to the hip; then you know that the knee is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the ways of it is that you make the patient rise upright, so that they can extend their leg, if possible; place the two feet on the ground, and place their foot between the two feet; and then make them adhere to the knee with both palms, and hold those between the two fingers above the knee of the patient in fortitude, and another minister extends the aforementioned foot until the knee returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction of it is that their leg adheres to the hip with elevated laborlessness.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply it and make the leg adhere to the hip, and then tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk for some days, until they are healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	Maybe if the reduction of it is excused, then administer strong extension to the ligaments of those in the cure of the preceding narration of the ankle.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the cure of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some ankles are removed by small movement, and some are dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either in the posterior parts or in the anterior parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflating proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	Maybe the cure of the movement of it is by gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with facilitated hands and should be jointed until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	Maybe in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to completeness, it is necessary that you make the patient rise upright, and hold that with one strong and valiant minister from the back part of the foot in its proper place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you put your right hand on the foot above the ankle, and with your left hand below the foot at the place of the Achilles tendon.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then you pull the foot to your right hand, and with your left hand for two movements, and then extend with your left hand; and you place the toes of the foot on the right side towards the leg, which is in trouble.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And it does good evacuated secretions according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then apply poultices to the foot at the third evacuated place, and you are at the small intestine.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one evacuation or in two according to this method, and if the foot is restored, it is good; and if not, then over it iterate the operation, because that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it with water that we have recommended, then place the patient on their back on a firm earth, and stretch out a bandage firmly around them, and enclose between their thighs, and you have already enveloped them in a sheet so that the patient does not escape.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a lien that lies on the ankle of the foot; and then extend that same minister against the extension of the back, and the bandage is extended between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body of the patient does not incline towards the parts below its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns to its proper facility.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause the application and stretch out that bandage firmly, and bind the foot with a lien to the ankle.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And take care that you do not touch or guard the nerves which are located behind the ankle, so that the bandage on that does not become violent and holds it firmly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it like that for two days or for three; and if the bandage is softened, stretch it out again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if you are forced to go into that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation does not become dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive a cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you should happen upon an aposteme, then take care that you administer in the sedation of it with what precedes our narration, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is remedied.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the Cure of Dislocation of the Toes of the Feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that what is dislocated be reduced with little extension of its effort; and that which is not difficult, therefore it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit with their foot on the ground or on a table, and it should be established thus as if they were going.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand by their feet, and place their foot on what appears to be the joints, and then calcify that in their foot towards the vertebra until it returns, and see that it is already reduced and does not appear at the eminent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the belly of their foot on a table that takes the whole foot, which has two cups, and then stretch it in a decent structure and hold it firm for three days; and then remove it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the Species of Dislocation that are Caused by a Blow or a Fracture or some other Accidents.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you encounter any of those causes, and you are proficient in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many evacuated successes will follow, avoiding death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason it is not necessary that on the cure of it you presume, but rather one who is wise in the art, from long usage, merciful and piteous, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that cast out apostemes as much as possible, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, except for the one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then it is necessary to hasten as much as possible the reduction at the beginning of the cause, lest an aposteme should become entrenched.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that casts out an aposteme and cures the wound with what is convenient for it from the beginning of the desiccated injuries.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and you encounter separated bones in the sacrum, then you perform their statement, and do in that what we have said about simple maladies of that which precedes in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear, as it has preceded my prediction; for it is better for you to give glory to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your body truly, those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus the phrases of Albucasim are perfectly defined by those whom God has not blessed.
Amen.	Here is the next translation:
