Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The words of Albuquisim begin here.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, now I have completed this book for you, which is the final part of the science of medicine, since its completion has brought it to an end, and through its explanations and declarations, it is my wish that you may learn from this treatise, which is a part of surgery, carried out by myself.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the surgery done by me is spread out in our region and in our time, and it has been utterly privatized; so that the science of it is greatly endangered, and its practice is obstructed; and there remain only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered more and corrupted into those errors and mistakes, until the intentions of it are closed off and the force of it and the art are exhausted.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is clear to me that you must revitalize that ancient order of this treatise through the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools of the work may be added to the declaration, and prepared for use, which necessity arises.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good craftsman cannot be found with his own hand in our present time is that the art of medicine is long and requires its actor to have been exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which was understood by Galen, so that he knows the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number and arrangement; and also of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their effusion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore says Hippocrates that a name is not enough, but rather in small work and most of all in the art of one's hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said this about him in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not well-versed in anatomy as we have described it, will not be spared from falling into error by which many men are killed, just as I have seen many of those who are thus formed in this science and take themselves out of that without science or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For you saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had caused an abscess to form in the throat of a woman, and had cut some arteries in the throat so that a great deal of blood flowed, and as a result the woman died between them.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And you saw another doctor who ordered that a stone be removed from a man's bladder, which had progressed in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and removed that stone with a piece of his own intestines, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you yourself had already appealed to remove it, and saw that due to the largeness of the stone and the condition of the patient, one could conclude above him that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you saw another doctor who took payment from the duke of our land for surgery, and endeavored to set the fracture of a blacksmith's broken leg; but the doctor prepared it with his ignorance, removed the fracture above the wound with pulleys and astels with great tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he loosened it according to his desires, and then relaxed the bandage, and then loosened it again after some days and commanded us to loosen the bond; and thus it was that the leg and foot became gangrened, and came to destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you were called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bond, and as a result he obtained relief and began to be freed from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But meanwhile corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the patient was in mortal danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And you saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and allowed it to ulcerate about three days later, until the great majesty of the disease overpowered his lordship.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which is because the melancholic humor is pure in the cancerous person, whereas it does not need to be brought forth by iron, but rather to be present in a member that suffers from being completely possessed.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation done by me be divided into two parts: one is in the operation which is associated with health, and the other is in the work where there is danger to the greater dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in this place throughout this book where the operation is one of error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and avoid that, so that foolish people do not get in the way of speaking and dishonestly besmirching your reputation.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your own arms with solicitude and the protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method through the grace of God to achieve salvation and glorious success, and overcome terrifying illnesses that are difficult to heal, and stand your ground with these arms that make you afraid, so that your position in your faith and in your name does not fail: for it is more remaining to your glory, and even more in this world and in the end to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen has said so in some of his own monodies:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"'Do not heal bad illnesses, lest you be called a bad doctor'".
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and the first part of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter, orderly arranged from head to foot, in the forms of instruments and iron tools for cauterization, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on dryness and perforation, and on cupping glasses, wounds, and extraction of splinters and similar things, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on curing of twists and similar things; chapter ordered from head to foot, and of the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and sharp medicine, and recalling of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that begins the treatise of this entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	You must say what quality the joints of that cautery have, and what are its defects, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the joint of cautery and its defects is a long and prolix one, subtle in science, and hidden in secret; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and to me it seems sufficient to present a small part of their sermons, fearing prolivity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery is suitable for all general conditions universally, which are in matter or of matter, except two conditions, which are hot humoral conditions.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the hot and dry condition with matter, it dries out; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a hot and dry disease, with water that is hot and dry, should be cured.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And say that which says the opposite of this, that through cautery, the joint is made in all hot and dry diseases that are found in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humors to the condition of fire, you find the body of man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the sermon of that, that this experiment has already been discovered to me on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But it is not necessary that this come to light again about what has already been experimented and exercised in the chapter of cautery, and to understand the diversity of human conditions and the disposition of diseases in their respective members, and the causes of those, and the accidents of theirs, and the space of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other conditions, there is no fear for you, and most especially in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors have agreed on those, and are not discordant about the joint of cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that from the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness, it is clear that those who use cautery with medicine are in error, for fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized, not affecting another member connected to it except with slight harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of medicine combined reaches that member which is distant from it, and easily brings disease to a difficult-to-cure member, and easily causes harm.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except that it superfluously adds. And already we have known through experiment and long service in studying the art, on the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of the sermon. But if it were not for the fact that it is not read in a better book in this pause, to you, a secret hidden in fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies, and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, with a philosophical demonstration, which would be suitable for your souls.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at any time, for the damage caused by the accidental time is submerged in the joint of this which is attracted to the cautery, and most especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and violent, which do not suffer delay because it is feared of those who come with malice, that is greater than a small harm entering through the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus it is not considered in your souls, or, sons, that this is not esteemed by anyone but the common people and foolish doctors, so that to that disease which is cured by cautery, there is no reduction at any time, and they pause at the consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus as they say for that reason, because cautery is nothing but in a place of medicine which alters the condition and dries up the humors which are the cause why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But in any case, cautery is excessive over medicine because of the desire for its virtue and worthiness of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his disease will return at some hour of time, according to the condition of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of superfluities in him, and what is obtained by him in his acquisition through foods and similar causes; except that the disease which is administered with cautery is a subtle disease in a few superfluities and humors, just like the cautery of the tooth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in him the pain will not return, but rather it will be reduced in smallness.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And besides, the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it's a dreadful remedy, not to what they understand in it, because I believe that there is no cure that benefits by medicine or any other cause, approaching to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine not at all when we administer the methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and it approaches the end of the cause, then one administers cautery, and profits from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And hours ago I said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand, and which the common people and foolish doctors also understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except by the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make a difference, just as it is not absolutely true, for I have already proven and demonstrated that it does not do this except in some bodies or others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron just as they say; but however, when you do cautery with fire on gold, it is not declared to you, because it depends on the quantity that you want by the hardness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust it above it, ignition occurs, and case some layers form so that the craftsman can see through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore, it is made to do cautery with iron in a way that is lighter and more proper for the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have arranged those from head to foot, so that the one seeking it may easily find what they want.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On Caustics for Headaches caused by Coldness and Humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The First Chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization brings relief to the humidity and coldness on the service of the accident of which there are two causes: one cause is soda and multiplicity of fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the partitions of the eyes and ears that flow, and multiplicity of sleepiness, and toothache and gout, and universally all disease that comes through coldness, just as paralysis, stroke, and apoplexy, and similar diseases in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, I command the patient to be purged with laxative medicine in the head, for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the patient and their age and habit requires.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make that section sit between his own hands on a covered bench, and have him rest his hands on the stones.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the razor's stroke at the tip of your thumb, right above the nostrils between his own eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the above said location is reached, mark that location with a tent, and then light the cautery olive of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause that [cautery] on the marked location with the tent, in such a way that it descends gradually, as your hand is constrained little by little, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see that some part of the skull has been uncovered, just like the amount of grain of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to that iron [cautery], use another one, if it is chilled, until what I have told you is seen by the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the location and let it stay for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause over it, covered with a cloth in the border and let it stay until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the location with four-part medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the wound remains open, so much the better, it gets the balm, because it is more suitable and beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the tongue should be cauterized inside the bone, and kept there until some part of the specificity of the bone is absorbed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it should be removed from that which has been absorbed by the bone, and then it should be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery, it should be brought to the end, until it presses strongly on the bone, until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little alfalfa:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	and they think that from that location, the vapors of the head will be released.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the open wound should be kept for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But to me, it is not seen in these two species of cautery from all, except in some men according to the way of fear; and leaving that, I must say that it is better for health when it is so, because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity like we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of fierce nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cautery is more saved and better, it seems to me; and with that house and that work, there is health.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On Caustics for the Head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head in a patient who is prolonged in his malady, and uses of wars, warts, capillaries, poultices, emplasters, goutzes, cadels, and gualinas, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which relents and does not benefit the patient at all, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong creation in his nature; and if it is not fierce and does not find great cold, then that other cauterizes another cauter, leaving a little bit.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize it on the crown of the patient's head with another cautery until the tongue is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the tongue and uncover the quantity of bone which we have recounted, and cauterize it with one cautery in the back part of the head at the location called "vas", -- and that is the location where a ventose is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand away from there, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this will feel a great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery is in its place, because it needs the cautery with which you cauterize the crown of the head and the occiput is more subtle than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Third Chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Caustics for Migraine Not of Ancient Origin.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the patient has a headache in the back of the head, or it spreads to the eye, first purify the head with laxative medicines, and then administer the other cure which I have said in the divisions of diseases; and if none of these helps, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with acute medicine combined, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But the cauterization with combined medicine is when you take a small amount of aloes, and extract it and cut off the extremities of both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then cut the location of the pain in the temple with a well-sharpened knife until a small opening is made, leaving the tongue to be hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen it with a stopper pressed down by gradual constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove the bandage and treat the aloes, and let the wound stay for two or three days, and then pause over it covered with a cloth until the location makes an opening.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with four-part medicine until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some combined medicines which I have written in the two treatises on combined medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterization with iron, according to this method: ignite for the purpose of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and is called "claw of nails", because the head of it is like a form of claw in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then pause on the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that the iron is not absorbed into the bone which remains - and slowly turn the small iron with velocity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of bone that is absorbed by the specificity of the tongue is like the majority of bone, and raise your hand for this reason, so that the artery which remains is not absorbed, so that there may not be a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak the cloth in saltwater and pause it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then remove the cloth with a border, and cure with four-part medicine until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the tip of the knife according to the caustic, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this non-ancient migrainous pain.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On Caustics for Ancient Migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure migraine with what we have said about the previous cure and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not work and the disease is so severe that it does not reach the amount we have said for the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then it is necessary to ignite the knife cauter until it is whitened, since you signify on the location of the pain with a line of length which is the majority of the finger, or what is that; and pause your hand for a moment and strengthen that until you cut into the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuity of the jawbone, which is damaged by mastication, and that the ligament not be absorbed and the nerves that are affected by it, so that there is no spasming.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is on the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially to him who ignores what he does and is not studious and experienced; and leave the operation to begin.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find in the remembrance of the regimen of blood flow accidental to the artery according to your method, in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not reach the cauterization and you see the patient's body is tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head just as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cauterization which we have said in the chapter on stretching of artery with two cauters, and this is the better cauterization and more suitable.
Capitol .v.	Fifth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On Caustics for Earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the division, and if the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cauterizer, and this is called "punctum", the form of which is:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then make the punctum and approach the ignition, and be carried around the entire ear like a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of each example if the pain is in one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Hold the cauterizer at the root of the ear, little by little, until you have marked the location with intent.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterizer touches all the points in the entire ear, and those ones, and then cure the locations until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On Caustics for Itching.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Itching which is cured and with cauterization is only of the species that comes from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species which occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of itching with ointments and poultices and gualguaries, and your cure does not relieve the patient, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizers: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cauterizer on the contrary side of the affected part, because softening only appears on the part that seems to be healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterizer on the right side of the extremity of the ear, slightly above the crown of the head, and on the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb's joint, and pause your hand with the cauterizer until the quantity of the majority of the bone's specificity is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauterizer, and it is a species of the knife cauter, the form of which is before us.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But meanwhile, it is more subtle that you see only a little of what I have said; and it is necessary to cut away the excessive roughness in it a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the location with water as is before the process, until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On Caustics for Ancient Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with the water which we have said and your medicine does not relieve the patient and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauterizers: on all the horns of his head; and with a cauterizer in the middle part of the head, just as we have said; and with a cauterizer in the occiput.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of cauterization is done according to what was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And already it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then be cured with water as proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On Caustics for Oblivion caused by Flux.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Make sure that the patient is given in the beginning large quantities of ointments and pills serving as purgatives.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the head of the patient and pause on the occiput of it an emplaster described in the treatise on emplasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that for several days, because that is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order which I have said before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if it is good for those who are healed by this; and otherwise, then make three cauterizers on the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the uppermost part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cauterizer the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cauterizer with water as has been done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more and the patient is so tolerant, then make a cauterizer in the middle part; and if you wish to add even more, then immediately cauterize that on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And then cure that until it is healed; and be the cauterizer olive-shaped according to the form given before.
Capitol .ix.	Ninth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On Caustics for Paralysis and Softening of the entire Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Make sure that you process in softening the head with ointments and water as we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and immediately cauterize it with a cauterizer in the middle part of the head, and with a cauterizer on all the horns of the head, and with a cauterizer on the posterior part of it, and with three cauterizers on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body of many and the patients are tolerant and the disease is strong, then immediately cauterize that with four cauterizers on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards with a cauterizer until it is burned through to the bone marrow, and lift up your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that until it is healed, and this be an olive-shaped cauterizer.
Capitol .x.	Tenth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On Caustics for Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized the epileptic, but that epilepsy is caused by flux.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, make sure to soften the brain of the patient at the beginning with ointments and other cure which we have said in the division when the disease is great and the patient is tolerant except for medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the child cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gualguaries and mastigatories which serve to soften, for several days, with good nourishment of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and immediately cauterize it with one cauterizer in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and another cauterizer on the occiput, and on each horn of the head, cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then immediately cauterize that with cauterizers which I say, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And be the cauterizer olive-shaped according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause with a subtle cauterizer according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Eleventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Caustics for Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are humidified, corrupted and fluxy in great abundance, then immediately cauterize that with the cauterizers which we have said in the preceding chapter.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him water that softens the brain of it according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and make a tortoise-shaped depression downwards from it on the circle, and then place that in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be kept for six days, and be held from all parties.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then pause with an ointment; and it is more worthy of an old ram's fleece.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire with gentle warmth by measure, which the said patient suffered when he was in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that in the middle part of the head of him in the circle, and leave it until it is warmed through.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient for one week at a time, with another regimen of good until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to what is most of it, but so that you hold your hand with a cauterizer thus ordered: this is a species of cauterization which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then pause that wrapped in a border or in gray gauze.
Capitol .xii.	Twelfth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On Caustics for Water Descending into the Eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the eye by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens the head of it, and guard against all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cauterizer in the middle part of the head; and immediately cauterize that with two cauterizers on both temples if it is the beginning of water descending into two eyes, or of one eye if it is the beginning of water descending into one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cauterizer all the veins and arteries that are left in the bone; and be the cauterizers in that long on the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of blood flux when it is being cauterized; and if you see blood flux from it, stop it with some medicine which is to your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those, and caution with regards to blood fluxes.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some times it is cauterized in the cervical vertebrae left between two bones with two cauterizers produced afterwards.
Capitol .xiii.	Thirteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On Caustics for Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accumulated, and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location on the head outside, and it is verified that this is superfluous fluxy matter, then immediately cauterize that with a cauterizer which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes, and with a cauterizer in the middle part of the head and with two cauterizers in the cervical vertebrae left between two temples, and with two cauterizers in the cervical vertebrae left between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need addition, then immediately cauterize that on the entire breadth of the outer corner of the eye above the supercilium with a small cauterizer.
Capitol .xiiii.	Fourteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On Caustics for Bad Smell from the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that with water as we have said in the division and your treatment does not produce any benefit, then prepare and give to drink to the patient those cochias for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize it with a middle-shaped cauterizer and an olive-shaped cauterizer.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a clove-shaped cauterizer and two cauterizers on both superciliums, just below the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of not cutting into the artery lest you hurt it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the clove-shaped cauterizer, this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Fifteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Caustics for Softening of Eyelids of the Eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then immediately cauterize that eyelid with a cauterizer in this form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize that on both superciliums a little with two cauterizers in all parts, and be them stretched out to the temporal areas.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And be the length of each cauterizer according to the quantity of supercilium.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterizer, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is softened.
Capitol .xvi.	Sixteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On Caustics for the Eyelid of the Eye when the hairs are converted to the inner parts and punch the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye are converted to the inner parts in such a way that they pierce the eye, cauterize them according to two methods: either by burning or by medicinal concoction.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If with a cauterizer of fire, command the patient before this that he shall look at his hairs in such a way as those which are softening, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if you punch that, let him have their natural growth, then you strengthen the eyes of him with a bandage so that it may not be harmed until the hairs are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, pause the patient's head in your seat, and then signal on the eyelid of his eyes with a tent, with a sign which is according to the figure of a leaf of mirta, and be the beginning of the sign close to the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then wrap it in a cloth soaked with human urine or in mucus of papyrus on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cauterizer of which this is the form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the figure which is signaled, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the bone which is like a leaf of mirta, is completely burned through, appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health for this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it being lifted above the point of puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave that for three days, and then pause on it with a cloth until the scar is raised.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if some cause returns to the hairs for their natural growth and the eyelid is softened, then immediately do another time the cauterization on that just as you did previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid left behind, then immediately cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the hairs do not pierce the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cauterizer with medicinal concoction is this: you command the patient to look at his hairs until they are prolonged and equalized, and then make a cloth of fabric in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take one ounce of known sulfur and one ounce of living vinegar. The end! And then take one ounce of known sulfur and one ounce of living vinegar. Mix those causes well, and make that with fasting so that it is not warmed; and then spread that water over the cloth which is made in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and pause that on one eye or both eyes; and pause afterwards the eye cloth wrapped in human urine, and the patient's head be in your seat.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then pause the said thing on the medicine and press it a little and do not harm it until the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, for stinging is in it as if from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then when the patient perceives that he is feeling stinging, then immediately stop the medicine and wash it with your said water; therefore, when the stinging ceases, then again wash the eye with water; and then consider if the eyelid has been lifted as much as it was washed away by fire or incision, for then you are well; and if not, return to that same spot with the medicine where you did not apply the medicine before, and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on it with a cloth wrapped in a border until the bone of adjustment is eradicated; and then care for that with an ointment or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to be diligent in your operation, watching carefully that the medicine does not fall into the eye; and if the eyelid becomes softened after some days and some cause of the hairs pokes into the eye, then immediately repeat your medicine on that spot where the eyelid is softened, and do exactly as you did at the beginning, and approach it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of leaf of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to their greatness and smallness, and therefore according to that is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let not the way of righteousness be hidden from him to whom this art is studied in this book.
Capitol .xvii.	Seventeenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On Caustics for Fistulas that are in the Lachrymal of the Eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with water as we have said in the divisions of diseases and it does not correspond to your treatment, then consider that you must cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to pause his head in your seat, and hold the head of him some minister between your thighs in such a way that he is not harmed nor agitated with his own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then wrap it in a cloth soaked in human urine or in mucus of papyrus on the eye of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cauterizer of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is curved, like a shape of cane or of a vulture's beak, from one end where the cauterizer is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, it should be taken out like a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But in any case, the one that is curved is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and take out from it pus and dry up that one.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then immediately work on that and extract the discharge from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then pause on it the cauterizer which is well ignited, and take with your hand a little of the cauterizer from the eye to the nose, so that you do not err or the patient becomes troubled, and then pause the cauterizer in the gray of the eye and corrupt that one.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then if at the beginning of your cauterizer it enters into the bone, good is; and otherwise, immediately repeat the cauterizer one or two times, as needed; and leave that alone for three days, and then pause on that cloth wrapped in a border and surround it with an ointment to dry out until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it is passed 11 days and it is not healed, then immediately pause on the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and shaved according to what is written in your own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier doctors also said: take the location of the fistula and fill it with it; and then pause in that fissure, subtle like this form: And pour into that the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a camal with good retention, and let not the patient be harmed because the melted lead does not reach the eye of that one; and it is necessary to pause on the patient's eye wrapped in human urine or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, good is; and otherwise, it is necessary to administer a blow through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to where it will come into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Eighteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On Caustics for the Cleft of the Palate.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times accidentally split fissures occur in the lips, and most commonly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, since you cure those fissures with the water that we have said in the divisions and it does not take effect, then ignite the small cauterizer of a knife-shaped form according to this manner:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And be the curvature of it according to the subtlety of a scalpel.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And then pause that instrument gently in those fissures until the cauterizer reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that with a cerate until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Nineteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On Caustics for Fistulas in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth there is an apostema and it grows, and breaks forth, and becomes antiquated, and a fistula forms, and you cure that one and it does not take effect, then consider that you must ignite the cauterizer according to the quantity received in the fistula; and then put that ignited instrument into the track of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end of it make it thus one or two times; and then care for that with the water that we have said about treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And then if the pus is discharged and it is healed, good is; and otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and uncover the corrupted bone according to what is written in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Twentieth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On Caustics for the Teeth and Softening of the Gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are harmed, and you cure those with medicines and they do not take effect, then pause the patient's head in your seat, and immediately ignite the cauterizer of which this form comes close to, so that you pause the quill on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cauterizer quickly, and hold your hand a little until the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift up your hand, and immediately repeat the cauterizer several times according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient will rinse his mouth with saltwater and hold it for an hour, and afterwards stop, because the harmed tooth is closed, and the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Twenty-first Chapter.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On Caustics for Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or there is frost or vermin in it, or the treatment with medicine does not take effect, then consider that cauterization in that case is according to two methods: either cauterization with a border of cow's milk, or cauterization with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauteri am boder is that you take the border of cow's milk and boil it in a metal pot, then take a cloth and wrap it around the edge of the tent, and then immerse that boiled border in the cloth, and pause that on the painful tooth quickly until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then immediately repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge a cloth or cloth in the border mentioned above, and pause that on the painful tooth, and then pause over that iron heated until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But in any case, the cauterization with fire is that you wait for the quill of iron or metal to be heated red-hot and in its heart there is some grooves, and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cauterizer in the shape that will come, and pause it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer is cooled; and do this several times until the pain is relieved or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that through the impression of that cauterizer, the patient will fill his mouth with good border and hold it for an hour and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cauterizer.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as you wish, to the extent that it is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the quill:
Capitol .xxii.	Twenty-second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Caustics for Hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are full of flesh and cold humors, and they do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to facilitate the digestion of those slightly, then consider that you must ignite the cauterizer with a curved shape, having two ends with humps, so that the fumes from the cauterizer escape through the other end; and pause that ignited instrument over the apostema once, and another time if needed, until it reaches the bottom of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then pause the cauterizer according to the quantity of the apostema; and then let it be for three days and pause over it a cloth wrapped in border until what the fire has burned out is relived.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that with an ointment, tents, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the quill or of the two cauterizers to such a thing is conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	Twenty-third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Caustics for Quinsy of the Throat and Constriction of the Larynx.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors come out on the quinsy of the lung, and most particularly when this is due to coldness of complication, then consider that it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at first with laxative medicines; and then immediately cauterize that one at the root of the tonsil in the affected location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not reach the tonsil with the cauterizer nor burn too much of its edge, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And then cauterize that one with another cauterizer at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cauterizer for that one is a cleft saw, as previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that with water that has been preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Twenty-fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Caustics for Disease of the Lung and Cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and disease of the lung are due to cold humors, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an old disease, then consider that you must cauterize that one with two cauterizers on the furcula in the affected locations, upward and downward; and with another cauterizer in the middle location of the chest between two mamillae; and let the cauterizer be a cleft saw according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, then make your cauterization punctate with the cauterizers that are called puncture, in the form which is described in the punctation of earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then make punctures into those [cauterizers]; and immediately care for that with water that is preceded until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauterizers have three ramps where cauterization is done with that one: in one go you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Twenty-fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On Caustics for Titillation that is the Head of Assistance.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the Head of Assistance is dislocated due to lubricating humors and it does not return to its normal place, and you see that it has become dislocated in such a way that it tends to remain so, as we have testified, then consider that first reduce the dislocation, and immediately lift up the patient's head or on his shoulder; and then raise the vertebra which is in the posterior part of the citillic above the said parts by means of your left hand if the joint is dislocated posteriorly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cauterizer with two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the vertebra until it penetrates that one into another part; and the figure of cauterization will be as follows: four heads of cauterizers.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and thus those subtle ones according to the quantity of the tendons; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some times it is adjusted according to this count, and because there are eight cauterizers.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cauterizer with pores containing salt, and immediately cause the patient to adhere to tranquility, and let the member not be harmed for any time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is made so, then consider that you must cauterize on the muscle with a cleft saw or with punctate cauterizers, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is dried up and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Twenty-sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Caustics for the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and many humors come out in the stomach to the extent that it extrudes from its natural completion and are multiplied in a room, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not take effect, then consider that the patient should be placed on his back, and extend his arms and legs, and immediately cauterize that one with three cauterizers: one cauterizer leaving the chest for the quantity of a finger's length with a cleft saw, and two cauterizers leaving the two sides of the cauterizer, until the figure of a triangular cauterizer is formed; and elongate between those which are not adjusted so as to make a pillow.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterizer is equal to the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the vertebra.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cauterizer will be according to this form, with addition; and if you wish, cauterize with a great cauterizer in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cauterizer according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And then cauterize the stomach punctate up to that which is feared from this cauterizer: and it is that you sense over the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tendons, and immediately cauterize that one with a cauterizer in the points; and immediately care for that with the treatment that has been preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Twenty-seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On Caustics for the Foot Fret.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the foot is affected by pain due to coldness or humidity or excessive sweating, and it has departed from its normal state through excessive evacuation, and the patient has not been cured with water as we have said, then consider that the patient should be placed on his back over his navel, and sense with tendons three cauterizers according to this form and this quantity pressed onto the foot below the hip bones, in which lies the seat of man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And be the space between each cauterizer according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauterizers be according to the length of the straight arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress the flesh with the cauterizer.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the marrow of the vertebra, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he is not standing, then lie down, which has already extended its legs and raised its arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And if it is possible for you to cauterize these cauterizers with a cleft saw, when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and be absorbed by the subtlety of all the vertebrae so that it is absorbed by the whole body and reaches the vessels, for the vertebra here is subtle; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Twenty-eighth Chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On Perforation of Apostema of the Foot with a Cauterizer.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you need to excise or perforate an apostema on the foot and you want to know if that apostema is in the flesh of the foot or in its skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will be troubled by gravity and pain without sharpness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, with great pain and many times that you have exhausted the doctors' cure.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, consider that the patient should be placed on his back over his navel; and immediately sense the location of the apostema with tendons; and immediately ignite the cauterizer which is assembled like a rag, its form having been described in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize with that and the cauterizer until all the vertebra is burned, until it reaches the navel, until it becomes a healthy wound.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately care for that one with treatment of other apostemas until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not consider that this form of cauterization should be used except by one who has prolonged his study in the art of medicine and has known many diseases; but as for this one, it is bold at times on this operation, but yet leave that to us, and may it be so.
Capitol .xxix.	Twenty-ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Caustics for Pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said the ancient ones that the cauterizers of the roots of aristology should be made for pleurisy from cold and dry roots according to this manner; and it is this: take a root of aristology long and dry that is found, and it is as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And immediately submerge it in oil and ignite it at the fire, and then cauterize with a cauterizer on that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauterizers left guiding, one slightly declining towards the side below the beard, and with two cauterizers in the area that is declining between the fifth rib and the navel, declining slightly behind; and with another cauterizer in the middle location of the foot; and with one on the stomach, and with three cauterizers behind; and with one cauterizer on that location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauterizers on both sides of the foot, left guiding the cauterizer which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not compress your hand with the cauterizer, but rather in the manifestation of the vertebra in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already some ancient ones have said that among certain men who use a cauterizer of iron similar to a ray and ignite it, and put it in the location which is between the ribs, until it reaches that apostema and purulent matter is discharged, just as we have said in the apostema of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cauterizer there is no fear, for he who does so will soon afterwards find himself in the location of fistula which is not susceptible to healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Thirtieth Chapter.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On Caustics for Malaria.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the disease of malaria with water as we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then consider that the cauterization is done in three ways, all of which are drying, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the malarial fever, following the figure of the cauterizers of the foot, whose figure has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cauterizer be the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of the cauterization be the same manner which we have said in the cauterizers of the foot, alike.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand with the cauterizer; and the patient should be lying on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cauterizer having two vertimentz, which cause we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the vertebra which is in the endright of the malaria, where the patient's left side is seized.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And be your elevation by which you elevate the vertebra according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizers may be made according to the latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And immediately insert the two vertimentz, ignite the middle one, so that with those you penetrate the vertebra from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And immediately extract the cauterizer; and therefore four cauterizers are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cauterizer having three vertimentz.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And immediately take care of the cauterizer so that it does not lay waste for too many days, because it is more certain than the other previous causes in healing.
Capitol .xxxi.	Thirty-first Chapter.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Caustics for Hydrocephalus.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterizers are not applied in hydrocephalus, but rather in acute cases proper.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydrocephalus with the methods of treatment which we have said in the division and do not confirm your treatment, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize with four cauterizers around the navel, and one cauterizer on the stomach, and another cauterizer on the foot, and another cauterizer on the malaria, and two cauterizers between the vertebrae of the back, and one cauterizer in the right side of the foot, and another cauterizer on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterizer should be proportioned to the subtlety of the vertebra.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And immediately leave the cauterizer unburied, so that it may remain for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient's cure by cauterization with water as is necessary, so that two intentions are added to it, and it is hastened with the help of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cauterizer with which the belly is cauterized is cleft-like, according to the form that has preceded it, and it is this one with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped, according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Thirty-second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Caustics for Feet and Legs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostematous in dropsy and full of serous water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on top of the ankle bone in nocturnal water that is between the auricular and the anular, and lift up your hand with the cauterizer and do not twist it; and immediately lift up your hand, and do not return to it at all, because the serous water resists.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the cauterizer according to this form: And immediately make two cauterizers on both legs, and in each leg make a cauterizer at the extremity of the cleft saw.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And be the cauterizers according to the length of the leg: one at the ankle and the other below the middle of the leg; and on each leg, two cauterizers.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open without healing for a long time, so that some water may flow out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And immediately cure with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Thirty-third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Caustics for the Belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is troubled by flatulence and humidity, so that it debilitates the virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and is cured with water according to the methods of treatment and does not confirm, and sometimes the patient suffers from a caustic display of virtue, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize it with a large cauterizer on its stomach, following what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the ring-shaped cauterizer and four small cauterizers in the circle of the navel, with a cleft-shaped cauterizer; or with two cauterizers.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humors exhibit themselves and the patient tolerates water, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize it on the navel and on the intestines, and firmly adjusting two cauterizers on the stomach and near the groin, for it is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Thirty-fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On Caustics for Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature there remain old hemorrhoids or one of the thick humors that are fretted or corrupted by humidity, and are cured with water as we have said in the division and do not confirm with your own cure, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize with three cauterizers on the posterior part of the small triangular bone and the small triangular bone, and with one cauterizer above the navel cleft by two threads.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach of him is inflamed and his food is not digested, and his face is sometimes apostematous, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize with a large cauterizer on his stomach, following what has preceded; and with one cauterizer on his foot, and with another cauterizer on his malaria, with a cleft-shaped cauterizer; and leave the cauterizer open for some time, and immediately cure him until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Thirty-fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On Caustics for Abscesses, Properly Made.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut away the abscess, then immediately ignite the cauterizer that is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And immediately insert that ignited cauterizer into the abscess cut away, and lastly your hand so that the cauterizer reaches the orifice of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make it once or twice, because if there are many abscesses, then immediately cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and immediately cure those with water that agrees with their conformation until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cauterizer on something, it is more likely to be in judgment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Thirty-sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On Caustics for Fistulas, which are made in the natural parts of him.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is terrified by this, it should be cured with a cauterizer.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the natural parts of him and it is old, and corrupted by pus and corrupt humors, and thus what is more worthy than to cure it is to pierce it with a subtle instrument, and immediately know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned instrument.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And immediately ignite the cauterizer which is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And immediately insert that ignited cauterizer into this fistula, and according to the quantity of depth which the instrument indicates.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cauterization on that fistula until those corrupted bodies are burned away in one or two or three strokes, according to your own necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or to the intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not make a move except when the fistula is in a fleshy place and you are certain it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And immediately cure that place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and all matter has been removed from it, and remains thus for a long time, then know that it is now entirely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the prepuce of him, or corrupting, or going to those causes which will bring reminiscence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Thirty-seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On Caustics for the Throat.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the throat there is pain caused by inflammation or great ventosity, and for that reason the patient's voice is hoarse, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize that area on the throat with a cauterizer on each ronho, with a cleft-shaped cauterizer of which precedes the remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And firmly cauterize with the second one a little bit away, so that three lined cauterizers will come forth, and therefore they will be more likely to be in judgment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Thirty-eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On Caustics for the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debilitation and mollification occur in the bladder due to inflammation and humidity, such that the patient's urine does not retain its normal consistency, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize that area on the most posterior part of the bladder, where the hairs of the navel begin, and cauterize with one cauterizer on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And be the length of each cauterizer according to the quantity of knots in the bowstring; and cauterize that area with a cauterizer on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauterizers if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And be the cleft-shaped cauterizer as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Thirty-ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Caustics for the Arteries.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is inflammation and humidity in the arteries, and for that reason it is prohibited from being provoked, and the menstruation of him is corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and pain occurs due to the hardening of them, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize that location with three cauterizers in the circle of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cauterizer on the most posterior part of the back, or with two cauterizers; and be the cleft-shaped cauterizer.
Capitol .xl.	Fortieth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On Caustics for the Dislocation of the Ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are effused to the part of the ankle, and causes of swelling occur in that location, and a sign of it is that the leg is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is situated in him who has been broken in his foot.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore consider that it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the part of the ankle with a ring-shaped cauterizer, as you have marked with an instrument in the circle of that part, and because the part falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And be the cauterizer which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cauterizer is not available to you, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize with three cauterizers and a large olive-shaped one.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cauterizer according to the quantity of the subtlety of the entire vertebra; and immediately cure that area until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Fortieth-first Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On Caustics for the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the part of the ankle, and its cause is inflammation and moisture, the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not confirm, and that is corrupted, then consider that it is necessary to purify the patient's thick humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and immediately cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cauterizer in that case is according to two methods: or cauterizing with burning medicines, or cauterizing with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And thus according to two scientific methods, one of which is to cauterize that area on the part of the ankle of him with three triangular cauterizers in this shape; and make good depth in those.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And be the space between each cauterizer the quantity of the thickness of the digit, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cauterizer.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often than not, there are four cauterizers on the middle location above the head of the ankle, for they are.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and thus be a continent circle that consumes the subtlety of the entire vertebra.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the joint.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	More so, if it extends into the joint, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize with two cauterizers on the joint over the location where the patient feels the pain; and with one cauterizer on the femur for four or five threads a little above the pubic bone.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cauterizer is cutellated, and be the depth of the cauterizer according to the quantity of the subtlety of the vertebra.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient feels that the pain is extended into the location near the tips of the fingers, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize here where you feel with a cauterizer for three or four points or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels that the pain is left below the kneecap and goes to the joint, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize here with a cutellated cauterizer.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not burn nerves or large arteries, and that by doing so, it would be bad for the patient or cause a counteraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one and another of those who were cauterized on the femur and finally in the cauterization, and the inflamed fiery focus inside which the tumor has reached its peak, and the perforated and corrupted foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And immediately a violent solution of the bowels, and immediately death follows.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say that in the cauterization of the ankle, this is the method: make it similar to a iron circle with a circumference equal to half a palm; and be the width of its orifice according to the thickness of a walnut or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle be another one third; and be the space between them the quantity of knots on the bowstring; and be those circles two-partied; and be the length of them one knot or two knots, and make in those iron margins decently adorned with the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And immediately ignite it in the fire until it becomes red and gives sparks, and immediately pause over the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that area with three cauterizers rounded in one stroke.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And immediately leave that area alone for three days, and immediately apply an emplaster to it with a border, and leave the wound open for many days; and immediately cure that area with remedies until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Thus says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this kind of cauterization we have used but little due to the fear of the regard of him, and therefore we have found few who look upon it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But among the best cauterizers is he who suffered them himself, and found the location of him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cauterizing with burning medicines is what you do by making two circles having a perforated ring in which the goffer of the iron gate should be placed; be the length of the walls in the height of them two knots or as many as there are.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each one is equal to the quantity of the thickness of the digit; and be above and below, and be that they contain themselves between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And immediately pause over the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side, and place your hand on the part of the ankle; and immediately take cold water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water be with a small fire little by little, and keep that for an hour, and cause the patient to undergo the mordication and adjustment of him - when that mordication is as hot as fire - until the mordication ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And immediately raise your hand with the instrument and wash away the cold water from all of the ankle with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And immediately leave that alone for three days and pause over that border until the blackness of the adjustment is removed, and leave it so for some days, and run from there purification; this is the final in judgment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And immediately cure that area with remedies until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the joint or the thigh, make him sit in water according to how it is done in the ankle equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of cold water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of cause not extinguished from both sides of the one part, and crush them and pause in a new wave of which the left side is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into him ray.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause in the fountains of the other wave that is poured into it, and take above that alkali and cause that is alive from the warm water which takes them up to a finger, and then you compress them with your tieua hand for good compression, and leave the hole that lets out sharp water from the left side of the wave that is poured into.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And immediately adjust all that water, and take the one above another living cause and another alkali renewed, because at this moment it is so strong and sharp, which is administered in many operations of medicine and cauterization of other members, for operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines mixed with those which are cauterized wide, such as teazyzic and mel anacrat and cause of sabo in such a way that they are mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounted the operation and cure of a man from ancient times who was cured of ankle pain and sciatic vein pain, and magnificently said that it was a great marvel of his, and says that he did not need another cure, and when it is healed in one stroke as recommended, for it is seen to be so strong that it has entered into the bath and surgery already.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that he should be pressed with a certain vertebra, and if not found vertebra, then take fresh figua; and much be crushed with a little gray and be placed on the ankle in which there is pain, or on the joint, or on the thigh, and be tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient gives consent to the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And immediately put him in the bath and then when his body is heated up, immerse him in the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not good for anyone to use these medicines without the proper evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But already Escorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized in a goat's gash, it will profit to him much; and be the cauterizer with him according to this method: take wool and immerse it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And immediately take dry goat's gash and inflame it with fire until it is made into carbon; and immediately place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And immediately repeat this, and do not stop doing so until the sensation of the mordication penetrates into the ankle and rests the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called the "cauterization of goats".
Capitol .xlii.	Fortieth-second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On Cauterization of Pain in Two Places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in the two places due to multiple causes, such as by bruising or striking or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through infusion of wet and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cauterizer is not cut off except in this one species which is made by effusion of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is good to evacuate the patient with fetid pills and similar ones that are made on the two places where there is pain, three lines according to their latitude, plus one tenth in each line, as many cauterizers or more, depending on the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and his virtue.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And make a cauterization with pointed cauterizers.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizers with a medial claw shape according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Forty-third Chapter.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization at the Beginning of Goutiness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this illness attacks small children; and the signal of its beginning in children is that it occurs suddenly on their structure in the heel and causes elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find it in the last vertebra of the spine and the knots of him that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see this and wish to prevent it, immediately cauterize that area with cauterizers that are circles according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cauterizer over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with pointed cauterizers two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And be the points proper between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And immediately cure that place until it is healed with water as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware, for cauterization should not be administered in goutiness that is caused by spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Forty-fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains are caused by humid humors that envelop each member of the body, then when pain comes to the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this "gout" properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, since gout caused by humid humors is cured with a method of cure and the pains are not removed, then they are removed with cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize that area immediately after evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot with many cauterizers.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be the olive-shaped cauterizer, the form of which is this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary that points are made on the sole of the foot, then make them with pointed cauterizers.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise to the knuckles or to other joints, and many times it develops, then immediately cauterize that area on each knuckle with three or four cauterizers of all parts with this olive-shaped cauterizer.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauterizers are necessary for this cauterization to be yours, then immediately cauterize that area and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterizer before, so that it is only as much around the specificity of the code.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise to the knuckle and the two places, then administer the cauterizer which we have said in its own chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the masses and is called "sorcery", then puncture in the circle of the fibers as they rotate, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the said places, then puncture in the circle of the fibers on each knot and on the tip of the finger.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise immediately for several days to the joints or muscles, then cauterize all of them on every part of the aids.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient without good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is made with good regimen and humors are evacuated through this cauterization, then he will be healed, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Forty-fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a wound develops in the groin and says that it is hardening, and this is beginning to spread, then it is good that you tell the patient to stop eating on his usual day and to use gentle causes so that the wound will come out of his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And immediately follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his arm inside until it is fully extracted or appears with the thread or buds.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And immediately return that area with your said fingers and signal the rupture on the bone of the shoulder blade, with a sign that is similar to the middle of a circle at the upper parts of the chest.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And immediately ignite the cauterizer, the form of which is this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is very red and emits sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And immediately reduce the thread or the thread to its natural condition, and immediately place your hand on the location so that the thread does not spread.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already inserted between the patient's joints and left one joint, another serves on his thighs, and another on his feet, which has its own hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And immediately place the cauterizer on that sign with your hand and cauterizer standing upright, and cause that to go into the bone of the shoulder blade into the middle of the diaphragm; and repeat in another way if you did not succeed in the first attempt into the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the thread's yarn in the hour of your cauterization, that you do not burn that thread so that it does not bring great harm or mortal danger to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you are with the cauterizer, do not touch the bone, nor confirm your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is good that the cauterizer for children be subtle according to their great and measure of them.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And immediately cure the location of the cauterization for three days with a border, until the scar of fire is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And immediately cure that area with other remedies until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days until the location and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is good that you pause the patient's nourishment according to the length of time of his cure, which stretches his belly, and that the thread does not spread outward from the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And immediately when you wish to lift after 40 days, then administer it gently and keep him for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should be reduced in work and in filling with food and drink, and in violent voices, for when you use this regimen of entire salvation, then he will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you will say the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and do not want to stop, then cauterize the rupture with red cauterizer according to its quantity, and it is this that is exhorted from the code just as the third part of it; and immediately cure that area with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already some first ones said that rupture should be cauterized with triangular cauterizer according to this form, since it is signaled by intention:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a paused line that goes by the latitude in the lathe, plus above the rupture, and another line above it; and place your hand with one claw-shaped cauterizer, but the first cauterizer is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Forty-sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On Cauterization of Hiccups.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there develops in certain members by bruising or striking pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to cure with medicines, then it is good that you cauterize with pointed cauterizers.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And be the cauterizer for each member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and defect of it, location of hiccups and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is cured by the first cauterizer, good; and otherwise, then immediately repeat the cauterizer on that member; for it is customary with those pains to be punctured in a member to that member which approaches the one, so that you must succeed with those cauterizers until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Forty-seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers occasionally with cauterization by great benefit, and more so if the species of leprosy is caused by putridity of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and not denied, nor stayed, and fear for the patient that corruption may comprehend all of his body and all his composition, then cauterize that person on the head with cauterizers: one in the middle part of the head, and another two fingers' breadth from it, and on both sides over the ears; and one behind, on the back or nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand with the cauterizer a little bit into the bone so that it makes a small impression on the skull, and from there the scabs are dislocated, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated for him; and cauterize on the molars according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is good that you cauterize him with those cauterizers which we have said on the head; and with a cauterizer on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizers on both cheeks, and two cauterizers on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauterizers on the vertebrae of the back, and one great cauterizer on the vertebra close to the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on each hip bone, and two on each shoulder blade, and two on each elbow, and two on each knee, and one on each wrist, and one on each ankle; and cauterize him on all the joints of the said fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the fibers of his shoulders.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And take care not to burn those nerves which are over the tendon, lest you damage them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cauterizer on the shoulder blade bone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauterizers, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cauterizer, just as they have in their own flesh, because his body is already stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is good that the cauterizers are great or small according to the members and joints, as is preceded by the species of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And immediately cure the cauterized area with powdered errors' crust, mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Forty-eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is stupified or asleep and is cured with medicines, oils, and emplasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that stupified member with cauterizers according to the magnitude of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cauterizer enter a little bit into the substance of the code.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And immediately cure that area with remedies until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which develops in the muscles and bones, and in the vertebrae of the back, and then the numbness of the nerves which affect that member is removed, and the stupor is restored.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not assume anything about this, unless you are wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Forty-ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On Cauterization of Moles that are Melanomas.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When moles are old and do not respond to any of the remedies of medicine, then you should cauterize on it with a pre-emptive cauterizer for a little bit according to the quantity of the specific code until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And immediately cure that area with powdered errors and lentils mixed with red oil and leaves of arnica, and blood of dove or blood of heron, each taking one part and all being mixed together; and then let a cloth be applied to the location and placed there until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Fiftieth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On Cauterization of Gout.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When gout is beginning and you want to stop it, then cauterize that area with a circular cauterizer in the circle of it as it revolves.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And they say that it should be cauterized with the last cauterizer in the middle location; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it may ulcerate, and I have already seen this some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to be cauterized in the circle of it with a circular cauterizer as we have said, or with many cauterizers.
Capitol .li.	Fifty-first Chapter.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On Cauterization of Adulteries.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any adulteries are delayed in maturation, and thus it is due to the superfluity causing that, or because of the condition of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of adulteries; then cauterize in the circle of it with many small punctate cauterizers; and immediately release that which will fasten in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the perforation of it with a cauterizer, then you should ignite the cauterizer whose form is this: and place that in the middle location of the adulteries until the code penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterizer is placed in that location which is further away, because the arm of the body is relieved; and immediately cure that area until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Fifty-second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is corruption walking in the member, which corrupts it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that corrosion in a location where it can suffer cauterization with fire, then you should ignite cauterizers with claw-shaped tips, small and large according to what is convenient in that location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And immediately cauterize that area completely, until you eradicate all the corrosion and there remains no cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And immediately release that area for three days, and pause over the cauterized locations only once a day with oil mixed in to bathe them until all the scars are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And immediately cure that area with flesh-generating remedies.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows back healthy and free from corruption, good is; but if not, then immediately repeat the cauterization on that area which remains in the corrupted locations.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated with acute medicines, because that is a means to cauterize.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nonetheless, cauterization with fire is of greater benefit.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure for it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you will need it.
Capitol .liii.	Fifty-third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Nails and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times it happens that the parts left behind from the bad disease that is called nail, and it is a great cause, penetrating, which lames the foot; and cauterization in those areas is done according to two ways, namely cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization with fire is when you ignite the cauterizer with a concave shape similar to that of a vulture's beak, which is made of iron according to the quantity which contains the nail from all parts, and has subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And immediately pause that ignited cauterizer on the nail, and immediately revolve your hand with the cauterizer in the circle of the nail until the cauterizer reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And release that area for three days until you begin to see growth.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And immediately apply that area with wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and release the application of the emplastrum on that area for one night, so that it may be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And immediately cure that area with flesh-generating remedies until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and many times it happens so on the surface of the body, most especially in the muscles and bones, then it is good that you administer cauterizers with water; and this is done by taking a cannula made of earthenware or iron or beak of vulture, and placing it on the nail; and immediately pouring a small amount of hot water into the cannula, and retreating your hand, and revolving the area with compression of your hand all around, so that the margin of the cannula is pressed against the root of the nail, and allowing the hot water to flow slowly through the root of the cau; and waiting for the patient a little bit for the mordication of the hot water for an hour, and then releasing it, because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do the same for those and then immediately apply the other to all of them as they are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And immediately cure those areas where the roots of the nails have been eradicated with remedies that cause flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Fifty-third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On Cauterization of Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When it happens that someone has a tremor due to constriction in the nerves or due to fever of a causing constriction, or for another similar reason, then it is good that you cauterize that area with four cauterizers or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra and one cauterizer; and on the feet of him, and on his stomach with olive cauterizer.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremors of him cease and hasten the healthiness of the constriction-causing disease.
Capitol .lv.	Fifty-fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On Cauterization of Accidental Pains in the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are accidental pains and pus-filled abscesses which are caused by gross corrupted matters; therefore it is good at the beginning as appears, that it should be cauterized on top of the fistula with a subtle cauterizer made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of long-lasting erestology; or with a lentecular cauterizer.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is good to cauterize at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; and do not believe, and it is interrupted the superfluity causing those things, and it cures those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nonetheless, it is good that this be done with immediate evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Fifty-sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On Cauterization of Blood Vessels Accidentally Cut by Artery Incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times it happens that the artery is cut which causes the wound to bleed profusely or causes the incision of apostemes or cauterization of a member, and then similar things happen, and it is difficult to stop that bleeding.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, then you should immediately take a cloth with your hand and apply it to the orifice of the artery, and place on top of that the same method I have described many times until the bleeding of the blood stops and is no longer.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And immediately apply in the fire small and large olive-shaped cauterizers by number of pieces, and exhale upon them until they are made to be no longer.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And immediately take one small or one large of those olive-shaped cauterizers according to the location and wound where the artery is broken, on that vein which hastens more quickly than you have already cauterized the said, and apply it until the bleeding of the blood is stopped and reduced.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you have removed the said and extinguished the cauterizer, then take another cauterizer carefully among those which are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this immediately until the bleeding of the blood is reduced.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that another harm comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those places, and especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods: or with cauterization as I have described, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities are burned and the bleeding is reduced; or that it be tied with a thread or with a ligament by strong constriction, or that medications be applied to those places whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and be strengthened with pillows and decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers decent constriction to it with ligament and with strong constriction by means of cloths or by position of burning causes and similar things does not heal until later.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine, then do as I have indicated above on the orifice of that vein, and understand the great constriction of it until the bleeding is stopped from the highest part of the wound, and on the artery let it not be removed; and over the artery sprinkle with hot water of great coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and more carefully consider whether there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second part begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On Incision and Perforation, and Vents, and Phlebotomy, and Wounds, and their Similar Things.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cauterization with fire is suitable and with medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary in those things with the forms of the cauterizers; and we have organized the chapters of the subordination of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will continue in this chapter in that same way, so that the one who wants to learn this will be illuminated, just as he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, it is good, son, that you learn that in this chapter, it is for fear that it is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this, it is good that there be great caution in you, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation of blood takes place, and which contains the life, and the aspersing of the vein or incision on the aposteme or warning of exit or purgation of the wound or extraction of arrow or incision of peyra and their similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all those, you are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most of them, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you that this should not fall upon you in which there is situation, because sometimes the case demands from you methods of men with many methods of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them some will go away with their own disease and it is soon death for him, and thus by the vehemence of what he finds in his disease, and by the length of his disease, and with his disease there is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from them some will be given to your own child and said, you waiting for his health, and his own disease is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not good that you consent to him who comes to you with this method; and your caution be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not presume any cause over this unless absolute certain science which verifies this for you, and by which the praise-worthy success follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your illnesses prophesying and indication of that which is converted to health, for in that there is aid to you on the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires His understanding in you and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have organized this chapter into distinct chapters according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization, from the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be alleviated for you that which you request and need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the Cure of Water Which is Contained in the Head of Children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the navel is tightened on the child's head it causes.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause that is unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, death has been imminent, and thus it has been shown to me that the work is laid out in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water had his head always thus magnified to the point where it could not be contained even by its own size; and more so that the moisture increased to the point of mortal fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the bone and the skull, or accumulates below the bone on the forehead.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Therefore, the operation in that case where the moisture is between the bone and the skull and the aposteme is small, then it is good that you make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be about two nights until the moisture flows out, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the moisture is more increased and the aposteme is greater, then it is good that you make two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of it is that you should lift up the commissures of the head from all parts and the water is pressed out when you compress that with your hand to the partitions inside and it will not be hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is good that you make an incision in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And immediately after the incision, extract all the moisture; and immediately strengthen the incisions with cloths and poultices; and immediately insert something on top with vinegar and oil within five days, and immediately remove the bandage and cure the wound with tents and poultices, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which considers the magnitude of the aposteme and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore attend to the incision where the aposteme appears and the filling of water, and do so according to what seems best to you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery, and if blood flows out and the patient dies from that flow of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Second Chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the Incision of the Arteries Which are Near the Ears, Called Hilassey.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When it happens that someone has catarrh or swellings on the eyes or feet, and this is old, and there is no hope in it for the cure of medicines, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore it is good when you want to incise those that the patient's head becomes inflamed, and immediately make a rough cloth compress on the spot so that the arteries appear, and immediately strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and immediately consider where the vein pulsates; and the places of each one over the places which are near the ears, are pressed down, and only in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And immediately signal on the artery with a tent, and immediately incise each one with the spatula of each part, sharp as it approaches the bone, and this is done by the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, enter the spatula below the artery and cut it at the points of incision on the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two fingers' breadth, for when some vein is incised, the blood flows out with a pulsating gush, which springs forth by frequent jumps.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is good that you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers' breadth, and immediately signal with a tent, and enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And as for what is to be taken from the blood, it is a quantity of vinegar one ounce. and as for what is to be taken from the blood, it is a quantity of vinegar one ounce, or more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears in the virtue of the disease and the filling of the artery of it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the forehead, then incise it in order that it may not develop into a cauterized aposteme.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And immediately strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and immediately cure it with compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Third Chapter.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the Extraction of the Arteries Which are in the Temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When some ancient or chronic disease is present in the temples, due to humidities and qualities of the lacertae, or old and vehement sores similar to those, and it has been medicated with the methods of medicinal cure, but this does not bring comfort, then we have recourse to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those similarly as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient scratches the skin where the arteries are located in the temples; and understand by the pulsation of the artery apparent on the temple, which is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden from most men except for those with great fervor.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and immediately compress the spot with a rough cloth or evaporate the spot with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the spatula of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then take the spatula of which this is the form: And immediately scrape the bone with that with ease until you reach the artery; and immediately cut into it on top and extract that from the upper parts until you extract that from the bone and uncover those beneath, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then immediately envelop it with the extremity of the oncus; and immediately incise one part of that according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no outflow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And immediately evacuate one ounce of blood. until three ounces.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is good that you divide it into two parts with a double fold of cedema or with strings at length, and do not let it putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and there is an outflow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And immediately incise the superfluity which is between two bandages; and do this in that hour or at another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cauterizer in the bone and with a cutlery-like cauterizer until the extremities of it are incised, and remain in that same place.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work when the patient has fever or is of warm complexion; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish off the humidities, and therefore it is better in this case.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is good to immediately extract the arteries which fill the old cut with blood, and be paused over the decently made pulpits, and immediately be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and become hard in order that it may be healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another time the blood flow from the artery occurs, then immediately grasp to restrain that blood, or with a cauterizer, or fill the old cut, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of these causes are not present before you, then immediately pause your hand on the spot until the blood is congealed, and insert the spot with hot water of great coldness so that the sharpness ceases, and be strengthened as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is more easily done in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a tent, and each one, not ignited, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it may be lengthened, for they are not yet fully consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two blades is as follows.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But meanwhile if there is less sharpness than two blades are better, for if they are as keen as two blades near each other, and do not cut through the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, it is held that the heat of the fire is in those and the flesh is cut away slowly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all works and more gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space which is between the two blades is equal to the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the Cure of Corneas with Sharp and Acid Lachrymation of the Eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and the body of those veins which are above the forehead of the head is outside, and there is no comfort in this with any cause of medicinal cure, and the face of the patient becomes red and feels like a wandering march of ants, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, humidified so that the skin of theirs is congealed, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient doctors mixed in the cure of those with this operation, and named that cure as "spassa".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to scrape the skin which is on his forehead, and immediately incise three cuts evenly distant along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers' breadth: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the lacertae which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in two sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is three fingers' breadth.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or cloth, well dressed and moistened with the liquid in which blood is congealed.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And immediately insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, the form of which is as follows:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape off all the bone that is between two incisions on the skull which is above the bone, and immediately do this from the first incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And immediately grasp this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument which is called a cutlery, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the blade of that instrument so as to cut through the attached flesh and bone, and the edge of it should lean inward towards the bone, and push it forward until it reaches the middle incision, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But continue the incision up to where it appears on the bone, and immediately do this in the middle incision until it reaches the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the quantity of blood that has been extracted is equal, press out the places where the vessels of the congealed blood are located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately pause in each incision a cut of old cuttlebone, and pause over those pulpits filled with vinegar, oil, and vinegar mixed together, so that there may not be an outflow of cauterized aposteme.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer great abundance of hot water or bathing, and immediately cure it with a compress of basil and rose oil, and other things until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Fifth Chapter.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the Cure of Lachrymation through Cautery and to the Eyes descending from the Parts outside of the Head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When certain veins are cauterized and continue, and the eyes of the patient are exhausted and small, and their regard is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and their skin dry, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know by these accidents that the matters and cauterization do not come from many veins of the parts outside but proceed.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in these cases is this: that you command the patient to scrape his forehead, and immediately incise a cut at the middle of the forehead, a little off-center (and it begins from the incision of the left temple to the right temple; and the incision is into the bone; and lengthen your hand over the lacertae of the temples which are more towards the mastoid process), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the blood with a sponge or cloth, and immediately fill between the two lips of the incision with old cuttlebone or cloths dipped in vinegar.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately press down upon those pulpits filled with vinegar and oil, so that there may not be an outflow of cauterized aposteme.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have removed this and see that the aposteme is diminished, then it is good to press upon the bone until it begins to appear as flesh, and immediately cure it with an emplastrum exsiccatiu which makes the flesh appear, just as if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mixed them together, and from this make a poultice and administer it in these wounds at the time of the natural birth of flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Sixth Chapter.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the Cure of that which Catarrhs in the Ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The total cause that catarrhs in the ears is one of four species, for either it is mineral pyrrhea or a similar cause like iron and verdigris, or it is from plant material like cypress or fava, or it is a fluxible cause like water and vinegar mixed together with their likenesses, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore, when pyrrhea or another similar cause that does not agree with the ear catarrhs in the ear, and pause the ear at the sun, and if sometimes the pyrrhea appears, then immediately distill some oil of violet or samama into it, and administer the extraction from there, and make the stornutation according to condition, and block the nostrils beforehand by the event of stornutation.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And immediately pause in the cavity of the ear some cloths or wool, and stretch the ear to the parts above, because many times it is forgotten with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if not, then immediately administer the extraction from there with the instrument called gestae epicicarios, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if forgotten with gestae, be it so; and otherwise, immediately administer the extraction from there with a subtle onyx of few duplications.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if not forgotten by this, then immediately make a needle of iron and insert the extremity of the needle into the hole of the ear and close around the needle with wax and softened oil so that only the needle is left.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And immediately extract the instrument with strong attraction, for too many times as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if not forgotten in this manner, then immediately take a halved light or a prepared vessel with which the hawks grasp a small quantity, and pause that in the extremity of the ray, and immediately envelop it with a decently placed cut.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And immediately insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and immediately dry out the ear from its humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if not forgotten with all the causes which we have recounted, then you should cut it down before it becomes cauterized or spasmed.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting it down is that you first bleed the patient from the saphena vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of the matter, and immediately make it cease between your hands and convert the ear to the parts above, and then make a small incision in the root of the ear at the location where the grey matter is previously prepared.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the incision should be of lunar shape until it reaches the pyrrhea, and when the pyrrhea is blackened, stop that if you can with suitable instruments; and immediately close the incision at that hour with speed, and cure that so that it may be healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause that afflicts the ear is one of the fat things that increase and are inflated, then immediately administer the cure and extraction from there; but if it does not obey your command to come out, then you take a spatula of fine tin according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the cutting away of that fat thing which is fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not make it when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in many places, and then immediately extract it from there with onyxes or subtle gestures, or with incision as we have said, for it is alleviated the extraction from there.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered the ear, it is good for the patient to use stornutation according to condition at first, and fill their own ear with a little old cuttlebone, and then place a stone above that ear where the water is, and if forgotten, be it so; otherwise, take many sharp iron points and lemons of the same length as the finger, heat them in the fire for a while, and then have the patient insert one of those into the hole of their own ear and strike another point on the stone that is opposite the ear where the water has entered.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not cease until all the water has been forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water will be forgotten in this way that you take a piece of paper or parchment. and place one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end over the fire until the middle of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	and immediately place another piece of parchment and make it so many times until all the water is forgotten, and extract that with a needle as we have said above regarding the extracting pyrrhea.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But if in the extraction of beastiness that enters into that ear, it is a small thing, like this and similar, cure that as we have said in the division; but if it is from great body which appears on the sense of the vessel, then immediately administer the extraction from there with gestures and onyxes, and the cause of it is more gentle than all the other causes that afflict the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But if in the extraction of vermin generated in the ear, when you cure that with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and your cure does not take hold, then it is good for you to gaze at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any cause of the worms appears here, then immediately extract that with gestures or subtle onyxes; but if no cause appears, then take a needle made of straw and broad at the top of which this is the form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and immediately suck out with it a strong sucking motion, and do this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your command to come out, then you should block and close the circuit of the needle with wax as we have said; then immediately administer distillations which have already been tried by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or iron, made from straw, with a small hole in it and a flat top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus be as they pour into the cavity of the needle's container, here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the needle decently cut, and immediately drop oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or what you want from these medicines in the needle — and that is in the ear —, and immediately insert the ray with a cut above and press it gently with your hand on the compression of the matter so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil flowing out.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted in the ear has already been heated by fire for a little while.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear cannot endure this.
Capitol .vii.	Seventh Chapter.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure of Obstruction of Ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes certain children are born with the vents of their mothers not perforated, and this already happens in some men, obstruction in the meat of the ear due to a wound or flesh not having been there; and this obstruction sometimes is made in the forepart of the trunk of the ear which does not consent to the vessel, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the forepart of it, which does not comprehend the vessel, is in the most difficult dispositions for cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you succeed in comprehending the vessel, it is good that you pause the ear of the patient to the sun and gaze at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if there is an evident obstruction, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it is in which there is a small latitude, where one part is acute and the other not; and the spatula is two-edged like a lion's tooth, for so that it does not cause harm to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or in the meat of it, then you should extract that with subtle onyxes and cut through that with a vehement ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the forepart of the ear, then you should take a subtle iron ray and heat it slightly with fire, and immediately place that into the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you have detected obstruction by that which the patient finds with ease, due to gravity of hearing, force the oppression of it with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And immediately pause in the ear with cloth of linen according to the quantity of the width of the hole which you have wrapped around it with Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some white lead and soak it in water and powder over it, followed by use; and if the ear has already become apostemated, then it is good that you remove the lead and replace it with another lead which you wrapped around it with rose oil, until the aposteme becomes calm; and immediately cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then immediately immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and pause it over the ear, and use the other cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Eighth Chapter.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the Cure of Athelis which affect the Eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athelis which afflict the eyelids of men sometimes are humid, and at other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, it is good that you take those with ten-handles or onyxes, and incise them with an spatula of the roots, and immediately pause over the places as said.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain accompanied by bleeding comes, then you should cauterize those with a lunar cauterizer of subtle onyx.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to do it immediately after the incisions and many times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Ninth Chapter.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the Cure of Grandessia which comes to the Eyelids of Men.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it happens that in the eyelids of men some cause arises which is akin to Grandessia in its strength and hardness, and because of this Grandessia is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is that you should consider whether Grandessia is proceeding from there on the eyelid and is manifesting on all sides; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision on that with a fissure by the latitude, and immediately cut it off from all sides with ease; and immediately suspend it with an onyx and cut off the excess.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if your instrument is not prepared, or if you are only able to penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, then this will not help in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not suffer harm from it because the ointment of it restores that and enfleshes.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if Grandessia is declining towards the outer parts of the eyelid, then you should remove the surface outside, and immediately ease the eyelid and suspend Grandessia with an onyx, unless you are forced to make an incision; and press that from all sides, and if the eyelid through incision is lengthened, this will not help in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And immediately after the incision, wash the eyes with salty water; and cure the place with that which enfleshes until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Tenth Chapter.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the Cure of Axcirnach in the Eyelid above the Eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnach is a grayish substance which is generated in the tunic of the eyelid above, and more often affects children, aggravating their eyes and causing them to weep; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are shed upon them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason you must always wet their faces and sleep on their faces, so that the eyelids of theirs below are covered with humidified skin, which has already been inflamed, and there is imminent danger of apparent inflammation in the eye; and when you press the place with those words, you will cause inflammation within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some manner of operation is in that which the patient places their head on the tie and you immediately place a cloth of linen and oil there, making a calque, and make from it a circle according to the quantity which contains Axcirnach from all sides, and immediately place that upon that and press with those words so that inflammation may be aggregated in the middle of the circle, and immediately end in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incised with a fissure by latitude, and the fissure not be greater than the one made in flautobotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the forepart it is good that you make a cut all around until you reach the inflammation, because in the most desperate cases, inflammation proceeds by fissure according to the form of white grayseness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the said ties to the outer parts and revolve it between your right and left hand until it is scattered.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert into the fissure, lest with the spatula you do not reach the eye and disturb it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if there is no appearance of Axcirnach at the beginning of the fissure, but rather you adjust into the fissure a little with ease, so that Axcirnach may proceed; and immediately extract that as we have said; and immediately submerge cloths in water, vinegar and powder, and pause those over the place and strengthen them with polvils.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus some will trickle salt and pause it in the cavity of the fissure, so that what remains of that humidity may be dissolved.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And immediately cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if there is an apostemate in the place which becomes calm, then you should cure that with soft plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Eleventh Chapter.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On Methods of Touching the Eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of men there are born natural folds, and so becoming antiquated, then they no longer touch the eye and cause methods of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and skin, until this becomes a cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye, and it is cured in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what has been said before in the chapter on cauterization; or by atactini made through incision and suture; or by canna according to what I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore it is good that you pause the head of the patient in the tie; immediately convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, then it is well; and if not, insert a needle into that part which is nearest to the edge of the eyelid on the side where there are no hairs - namely, among the hairs themselves - and make the needle penetrate above, and thus - near the margin of the eyelid - pull out the thread to the upper parts with the eyelid, and convert it with a ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And immediately end in the outer part of the eyelid below the hairs with a spatula incised with lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and immediately extract the thread and pause below the eyelid with small powder or cloth, and immediately shut over the eyelid with a tent, and it will be thus as the figure of myrtle leaves.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But nonetheless it is good that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because this has already been diversified in men, since some of them require that a great quantity of the eyelid be incised according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And immediately end with the spatula on both lines which you have drawn, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is like the natural folds as they are in the king's beard.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And immediately place the onyx in one of the two angles of the wound, and immediately extract all that, and adjust with a suture the two lips with a gulf or fine woolen thread, and absorb the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads to two eyebrows with some perceiving causes; if you wish to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And immediately loosen the thread of the threads within three or four days, and immediately cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without suture, and cure that with what dries up and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated by the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but suturing is better. And thus I say to those who came before me to taxine.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But nonetheless in him there is solicitude for the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in him fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it is another manner in taxine, and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure as of myrtle leaves, and immediately elevate the eyelid with three unctuous substances separated and congregate according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to have the unctuous substances, and this is not equalized, then take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, and enter the other thread alongside the lacrimal major, and the second thread alongside the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the said ties the threads with equality, and immediately elevate your hand with elevating motion, elevate all the wound over which is marked as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And immediately adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if there occurs an apostemate because of your incision or your fissure, then calm that apostemate with cerote and oil-like substances, and with gentle remedies.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes it happens that the eyelid is converted so that its hairs are turned, then it is good that you use in that what we have said about incision; but suture in each case is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Atactining with canna is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and cut out the figure which is outside according to what I have recounted; and immediately make two cannae or two fine astals, the length of which is according to the length of the eyelid and the latitude of which is less than the latitude of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And immediately add each one with subtlety on top of what superfluously protrudes from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the cannae of each part with a very tight stricture, and leave it for some days, because the wound will die and become denuded and will fall inwards as it slowly descends.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then tear off the threads, and immediately cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two cannae which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and latitude neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Twelfth Chapter.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the Elevating of Pricking Hairs in the Eye with a Needle when the Hair is Hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough, and prickly to the eyes, the operation in that is that you take a fine needle and pause it in that delicate thread of silk or wool, and immediately adjust the extremities of it so that they fit together in a manner most subtle.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And be the length of the threads of the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And immediately compose another fine thread below it in brief, and tie the extremities of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And immediately place the patient's head in the tie and it be proper for the sun, so that your work may be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And immediately insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair which has required engineering, and make it penetrate into the eyelid rapidly until you extract it above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And immediately pull out the hair upwards and insert it into the alloy, and be the hairs one, two, or three, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And immediately pull out your hand with that until the hair is extruded and alloyed in the eyelid along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the alloy is attracted and not expelled the hair, you will attract the alloy to the parts below along with the thread which you have composed there, until it is expelled above the superfluous part.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And gaze at that with the vision of the eye, because then you will expel the alloy and the thread, and grate all and close the eye, and leave the closures for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows well on top of it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, then you adjust one long hair from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or let it be until it grows to a suitable space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Thirteenth Chapter.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the Cure of Echachration which appears on the Eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there appears in the eye Echachration, which is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on one side or the other, either above, below, to the right or left, due to bad consolidation of a wound or section or cauterization, and it is called Leporina, and this Echachration either occurs naturally or accidentally, and it is caused by consolidation of a wound or sections or cauterizations, or by resemblance to their maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation in this is that you open up that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause within it a piece of linen cloth, and bind those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not good that you use a cure for this of the causes which dry up and constrict; because if you do so, it will return to echachration worse than never had any.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that a cause which softens, such as fenugreek, and mix with the water in which it is cooked, or with a gentle poultice of aquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all artifice that is not consolidated according to the form which it had at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said, is nothing but some correction of echachration that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Fourteenth Chapter.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the Cure of Echachration which is made in the Eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This echachration which is made in the eyelid below, which is truly called vertadierament echachration; and it is either of natural or accidental origin.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is made by wound or section or cauterization or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and put it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And immediately extend the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise with a spatula broad.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good; and otherwise, take a ray and pause it in the cut figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close the two incisions on the underside of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And be the extremities of the two incisions at two angles of the incision which you have made, where they converge, and be of their own making an angle, so that when they come together, a figure is formed by them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter lambda (λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And immediately stop the flesh there by the quantity that is the thickness of the eyelid below, so that it may be cut.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately adjust the separated parts and sew those with a thread of wool; and immediately cure those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices, until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if echachration occurs due to fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary that you open with a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid according to what has been said before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And immediately separate with a poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of echachration when it is above or below, let the operation run its course according to what has been prepared in the form of echachration, and that is in the form of various modes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans prepare artfully in every manner possible for each case, so that they may return the figure to its natural form or almost, and that patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Fifteenth Chapter.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the Adherence of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men, it is necessary that the eyelid be solidly fixed above on the album of the eye, and prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and raise or extend it upwards with an unguent.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And immediately you incise the adherence with a spatula subtle, which is not sharp-edged, having a obtuse small part so that the patient may not be troubled by the operation, and leave the spatula so that it does not injure the eye in its subtlety.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And be your incision such that it excises that adherence with facility, so that the eyelid may return to its natural form and all the adherence may be healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And immediately you put in the eye salted water with which you wash, or distill into it zymic substances dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of wool, and pause on the eye lanolin infused into the albumen of egg whites, and immediately use for three days causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Sixteenth Chapter.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the Incision of the Ungue and Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimals.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the ungue is according to two manners, because it is either nervous, similar to a hard and subtle cipha, or non-nervous, similar to white congealed humidity, which when it touches iron, or is forced to take on oil, it is abscinded and the oil is not fixed in place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the lacrimal major, which gradually covers the vision and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the manner of working in this incision is that the patient puts their head in the tie and you immediately open the eyes of them, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and immediately collect the ungue with oil of little duplication and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And immediately take a needle and enter it into that ungue with a horse or ox or cow hair, or similar thread, or a strong thread, doubling the extremity of the needle little by little and placing it in the middle of the ungue, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with thread to the ungue; and extend it to the upper parts, and excise on the side of the ungue which is before the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow that with the hair until the end of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And immediately you incise the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and lift up the natural flesh of the lacrimal so that by this incision there may not be continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the ungue with its extended oil or thread, as we have said, and immediately it is excised with a lion's spatula, the form of which is this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And immediately the incision causes in the eye a little salt to be extracted or made from the juice of the sinic tree, and leave it until the next day; and immediately cure that with water as needed until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the ungue is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed with oil in that place, then many times this species of ungue is cured by medicines, and is healed thus as I have said and recounted in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then you work on the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion spatula with keen edge according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rarefied and is confused and enters into its root, then you distill from your own sight into the eye of sinic tree or with rose petal or with salted salt, and anoint the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And immediately iterate over that the operation until all that is of it is remade, except that the contrary apostema may be in the eye, because then you leave it, and cure the apostema at the beginning until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately iterate your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The Eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the eye for great harm, is suspended with oil; and you incise that from one part, and do not complete the incision so that you may not excise continuous flows of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And immediately distill into the lacrimal rose petal and sinic tree until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Seventeenth Chapter.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the Incision of Algae and Water that is born from Adjusted Flesh in the Eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some people there is born red flesh, and it is overgrown to cover the pupil, or approaches or strengthens above the eyelids and firmly compresses the eyelids against the parts outside and is assembled like a rose of balcony.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation in this is that the patient puts their head in the tie; and immediately opens the eyes of that and collects all that flesh with suitable oils and water, and then anoints it with a forceps or with a basket; and immediately incises the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the encisor, and be careful not to injure the eye by your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your incision with which you incise those or with spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the ungue, or with small forceps with which is collected according to the form that will come to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And then when your incision is completed and all that flesh is remade, immediately fill the eye with salted salt, or distill into it red powder and resembling those of corrosive medicines, and pause on the outside of the eye covered with albumen of egg whites until it is ensured against apostema caution.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains some cause of algae and is sealed with caution, and you fear apostema caution, then immediately leave the eye alone and cure that apostema with water that will heal that apostema, and immediately iterate over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the eye of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But however, you must ensure that the entire cure of the eye is through natural or accidental means, and not with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member being sufficient for that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Eighteenth Chapter.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the Collection of Scales on the Eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Scales which come forth red and rough on the eye and prohibit its operation, and disclose the eye with the length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which scales are present is strong and there is no other illness except scales, then you collect those scales.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to put their head in the tie and immediately suspend those veins with one or two oils according to your prudence, and let that oil be of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two oils gradually mixed together in a vessel according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And immediately those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and washed hour by hour, until you see those veins being remade from the eye and turned back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not injure the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, immediately you distill into the eye green or red powder so that with its keenness it may corrode the water that is remade from the scales.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this is not possible for you, collect everything in that hour, and immediately apply all the water that relieves the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is calmed down and it is ensured against caution.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And immediately iterate over it in the same manner until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Nineteenth Chapter.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the Reduction of Nasal Discharge to the Nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure nasal discharge with cauterization or acute medicine, as it is preceded by the narration of it and is not healed, then do not intervene in it except that you make an incision over the apostema until its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is in it and pour it into a container until the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackness occurs in it, immediately you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called the "Asper Cap", and is made of iron, and has a head rounded like an asher that is made pointed by lime or aliskalfati for subtle punctation (such as it is in this form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And pause that over the corrupted part of the bone, and immediately rotate it between the said ties, and press your hand little by little until you know that corruption is scraped.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then it is done several times, and immediately restore the place with causes of drying and purging.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the pus has been removed and there are no more than 40 days, and it does not renew itself nor become apostematized, and no accident occurs in it, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then immediately do not intervene in it except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and is that you uncover the second bone with iron or acute medicine, and when it is uncovered, then you take a trip according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the shaft of it be first exhausted up to the extremity thus as it is sometimes.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And immediately pause that over the bone, and be it close to the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the eye, and immediately turn your hand with the trip until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient by sensing that something is going to come out through which they are going to feel pain.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore immediately restore the place with purgative medicines that dry, just as if it were a poultice.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and the place are hardened, immediately the material that was flowing to the parts outside returns to the nose, therefore it is easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Twentieth Chapter.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye eminences to its total height and there is no accident or diminution in it, then you must loosen the patient, and immediately follow, and pause for vaporous breathing in the cervix without scarification and suck well; and immediately pause over the eye with a liniment made from acacia, aloe, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the poultice on the eye with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth be duplicated into four folds; and make powder from those.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And immediately pause those one on top of the other according to the quantity which the eye needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And immediately strengthen on those with a cloth of hard and strong texture; and iterate the bellows with suction without scarification; and immediately stop the bellows and leave the eye straight for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament is softened, then you must immediately make it tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And immediately stop the ligament at the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the eye is already reduced, good it is; and otherwise, then immediately repeat the poultice with powders, tightening and bellows until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Twenty-First Chapter.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uveal tunic and it is elevated and proceeds outside the palpebras like a grain of raisin, and its shape resembles that of a man due to this, and you want to incise it, then the operation in it is done as we have recounted, which is that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from the part left and the part above, and immediately put the other needle into the double thread of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and immediately incise the location of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen it firmly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And immediately extract the needle and pause over the eye with lanolin infused in egg whites, and leave it until the thread dissolves into the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And immediately cure the eye with water that comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather from all parts with a circle of cloth into the eye adjusted to great elevation, and immediately be perforated with a subtle spatula that comes to the prominence of the eye, and flow the humectant substance albuginea, and descend the eye and enter soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And immediately strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Twenty-Second Chapter.
De curacio de alconati.	On the Cure of Alconati.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, which is called Alconati, is nothing more than pus that is adjusted in the eye resembling water descending and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, and immediately take their head in your hands from two parts, and make them look into the pus as if they were looking at something; and immediately make it dry and not descend, and be quiet the light, and the patient sees the causes just as they see.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared for the descent of the pus with water as we have said, then immediately make the patient sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and find it on the panniculus cerning a small piece, that is to say, the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea in the crown (to the location you see), until the pus is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore when it is forgotten, then you distill into the eye water cooled in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have brewed fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately cure with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Twenty-Second Chapter (again).
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the Cure of the Water Descending from the Eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable for perforation as we are declaring, then use that according to its suitability.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and tie their own eye tightly with a string.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And immediately pause your left hand near the patient's left palpebra if the eye in which the water is flowing is the left eye; or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And immediately with your right hand take an almond if the eye is left; or with your left hand if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And immediately pause the extremity of the almond near the crown by the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and immediately squeeze the almond with virtue and rotate your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And immediately penetrate into the album of the eye and sense that the almond has already reached the desired point because of the vision.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the path of the almond to the prominence be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the tunic cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And immediately pause the almond in the place where the water is, and immediately attract it downwards once or twice more, and thus if the water descends soon, then look at the patient over which their vision is soon to be clouded, and the almond in its own eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And immediately pause for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you will lay that other way before the almond is dropped.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And thus when it is dried and does not descend, then you will extract the almond with ease, and rotate it with your hand little by little, and immediately dissolve in the water a small amount of clear gemstone salt and wash the eye outward; and immediately pause outside the eye with a cotton or stopper or lanolin infused in rose oil and albumen of egg whites, and bind with water the patient's eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we have those of our time who pause on that which is mixed with albumen of egg whites.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if they do not obey your almond at the instrument of the eye by its hardness - for it is some of those men whose eyes are very hard - then you must take the spatula which is called the "alberid" and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus perforate with it that conjunction, and do not stop your hand in the hole, and it is only if you make a way for the almond to reach the subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And immediately insert the almond according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work, be prepared for the patient's sleep, which is made to descend in a place of darkness, and it is forbidden from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature is aligned, and do not trouble their head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And be the ligature according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And immediately loosen that in the darkest and most obscure manner, and make them see some causes, and then return to the ligature within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not need to do that in the hour of curations or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They had need that you should alienate this because the water flows more lightly by great and vehement regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an apostema occurs, then you must loosen the eye within seven days and correct it with water that allays the apostema.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you must absolve the vision from that and pause on the face of the mouth for which the direction of the left eye is regulated for a few days, existing in the darkest.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And immediately be guided by that greatest degree and converted into its own causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases the disciple is not exempt from seeing some things, and immediately you will be bold on the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been reached to us of some of those who are at the Artach, and some said that a fire is made in the Ayrac, great and perforated, whereupon the water is drained.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But meanwhile I do not see anything like it in our land which has been perfected, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magnesia for which there is something above those which are ignorant of those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or of copper properly, and they are the extremities of theirs with this subtlety triangular, the pointed end just as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the Cure of Carnousness in the Nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born various fleshy growths adjusted of which some cause is assembled to scorpion's claw or polyp's foot; and this illness is called Polypus because it is like that of a fish represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it there comes cancerous flesh, blackened and dark in color; and from it there comes lion-like flesh not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and anoint the nose with oil, and pierce the tongue once in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And immediately extract that from the parts outside, and immediately incise there what you have comprehended of those with a subtle spatula from one part into which you know that all the flesh is removed; for if any cause remains from it which abscission is possible, then you must ratify that with one of the subtle instruments with ease until no cause remains from it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if you notice blood or an apostema occurs, then immediately pause on that which is necessary; for it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cut and cauterize that until the blood is absorbed and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And immediately be guided in the nose with the incision, whether it be with water or oil.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and there is humidity proceeding into the palate, then you will know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that behind it is carnousness in the pustules or bones of the nose to which no abscission has been achieved.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore it is necessary that you insert the thread of faith into one who has some thickness, and nourish him in his very marrow, and pause between each nourishment the quantity of said or less, and enervate the illness and insert one extremity of the thread in the nose with the ray or another cause which is possible to it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And since this will have been done, then draw their odorment into the channels of the nose, and be exhausted above their goiter, for many times they seem like children in schools, and it is a light cause to that which they wish to do.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And immediately pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that comes out on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and immediately administer a serration of flesh to the knots that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already united with the knots of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And immediately extract the thread, and pause in the nose about the abstraction of blood one quart, and do this for three days or more until the flesh is completely consumed that remains of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And immediately in the end of the cause, pause in the nose a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you degenerate from cure that exists, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument, the capillary purge maker, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or copper, which is like a small open lamp, just as a small shell, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument for capillary purging should be flat, open; to which there is a handle at the end, with which you can grasp that when it is filled with oil or water that you want from the juices and suitable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capillary purgings are precious: recipe of Castoreum from beavers, White Balm, Gingerbread, Yellow Pith of Safron, Long Pepper, Escarole, and Spica Ana Unc. and with a mixture of Suc of Bleeding and Caul, and make pills, and one pill be tempered with Tebesan water, and be guided into the nose of the patient who is suffering.
Capitol .xxv.	Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the Holes in the Extremities of the Nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it is born a hole in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and increased in several days until it is seen as the regard of it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore it is necessary that you incise that in the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And immediately pause on the spot or cauterize or medicine which is competent for that place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if it is delayed in its incision until it is magnified, then consider whether it is hardened, blackened, and lacks feeling; then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times those who incise this apostema are driven by great malice towards him whom it had previously.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apostema is of lion-like touch and not of dark color, and times that incision is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the place with what exists and constrain it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the Suture of the Nose and Lips and Earlobe when continuity is dissolved by wound or appearance.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there occurs dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer on that operation except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you are driven by some cause of those, know that if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, then immediately adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and immediately cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then it is necessary that you excise each part of its apparent cord until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And immediately adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and on top of those powder with dragon's blood and threefold thrice, and pause on the powder a plaster of diaphonic emplastrum, or of some other consolidative emplastrum, and let that be bound for two days or three, and immediately release that and replace it with another plaster, and let that be until the threads are absorbed, and immediately cure with anointing until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the method of suture is that you add the solution of continuity with threads, just as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread, just as I and thou wouldst make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the Extraction of those causes that come into the two lips in the parts behind.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times it happens to many men in the parts behind their lips that some hard and rough apostemas appear, resembling errors, and some are smaller and some are greater.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lips and fissures of each of those hardenings throughout all parts, and immediately fill the wound with sagitarius triticum until the blood is restrained, and immediately be washed with hot oil and be cured the place with what exists, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the Incision of the flesh adapted to the Gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great many times there is a swelling over the gummed flesh which the ancients called "albulus", therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with once or what you have with the forfices and incise that as it should be, and let the pus flow or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And immediately pause on the place with sagitarius triticum or other powders that are stimulating or exciting.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then immediately incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for the cauterization will not return again.
Capitol .xxix.	Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth of the parts behind and those of the forehead, and between the gums are adjusted rough, sharp, and blackened ones, some times they are blackened and are made citrines or greenish until the gum is corrupted and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and pause the head in your seat, and ratify the teeth in which those roughs and causes appear like sand until there remains no cause from them, and this makes of the blackness and citrinity and of the others until they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this is what is in the beginning of the reason, well it is; and otherwise, then you must iterate the reason over those for another day and secondly and thirdly until it comes to the final statement as you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of many remedies of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore since the remedies for the tooth that is extracted from behind are different from those used between teeth according to other forms, and these forms of remedies must be prepared by you which you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Thirtieth Chapter.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and patience throughout its entire extraction, for there is no cause that supplies the vigor of it when it is extracted, since it is a subtle substance within which there is an excuse in the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But it is necessary when the patient is prepared to extract that tooth, that you be firmly certain which tooth is ailing, for many times the pain deceives the patient and makes him think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and immediately the pain does not cease until the sick and aching tooth is extracted, as we have already seen by the operation of the barber's.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, since you must be certain which tooth is ailing, and you know well, it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with spatula in the part where there is some virtue, until the tooth is dissolved from the gum of all parts, and immediately proceed to cauterize that with your own fingers or with fine forceps, little by little, until it becomes concave.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And immediately afterwards, hold the tooth firmly with great tenacity for good articulation or strong extraction, and pause the head of the patient between your fingers that well keep it so as not to trouble him, and immediately remove the tooth according to rectitude in manner so as not to break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore if it is not forgotten, then immediately take one of those instruments and place it at a distance from the tooth on all sides with ease and effort to remove it in this way as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is bruised or corroded, then it is necessary that you wrap with cloth the bruise and strengthen it at the end of a subtle ray in order that it may not be broken in the hour of your constriction upon it while you are holding it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work exactly with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so as not to break it and remain parted from him, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity on the extraction of theirs, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great maladies which are more difficult to be broken, and their remedies rendered useless, or some of those, or that you extract it with some bones of the mandible just as many times we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And immediately after the extraction is done, wash the mouth with hot water or warm oil and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding afterwards, just as many times it has happened, then immediately apply some quantity of egg white and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that egg white does not congeal, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and fine handles with which the tooth is mauled at the beginning should be of long extremity, short manubrium, and thick, in order that they may not bend when you are working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And be like times of thick manubrium so that when you strain with those forceps they will not bend, with short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And be made of Indian iron with descending shapes like those of the right extremities, and in the extremities of those forceps be teeth that fit into each other and strain by strong constriction, and sometimes those extremities are shaped like the beak of a crane called ciconia, so it is guarded, and are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Thirty-First Chapter.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Extraction of Teeth and Removal of Bones from Mandibles Gnawed.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth which is gnawed by some cause, then it is necessary that you pause over the place with a border for one day or two until the place is mollified; and immediately thereafter apply gentle or hold the extremities of those which are assembled to the beak of a crane called ciconia or guard, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their extremities are made behind like lime or alfarfa.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey to your touch with these forceps or handles, then it is necessary that you dig around the root and uncover all the flesh and insert the instrument which has no name, but is a small lever whose shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should be of short extremity, thick and small, and not bent in such a way that it will not gnaw.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is forgotten, well it is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already you help yourself with this instrument having two ramps, the shape of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the extraction of teeth; for immediately it is made with this instrument which is assembled like a great once, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of a twisted or short triangular extremity with some thickness, and not bent in such a way that it will not gnaw.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that many of the instruments for teeth are similar to each other and resemble the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the artisans skilled and subtle in their art, find for themselves according to what each operation and diverse diseases mean; for they are of diseases to which the ancients did not give nor pause a proper instrument, due to the forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or of the other bones of the mouth is gnawed, or if it is puffed up, then immediately be very careful about that in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of teeth, and help yourself with gestures like this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be in the place some thickness, little by little, and be wrapped or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and immediately restore the place with medicines suitable for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small puffiness in the bone, then immediately remove that from that puffiness and darkness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Thirty-Second Chapter.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the Cure of Teeth Elevated above Others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are elevated and do not follow their natural form by those, and most especially when they appear in women, and most especially in venerable old ladies; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is nothing like another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or bind them together, then immediately extract that one; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you must incise it with this instrument whose shape is as follows; and it resembles a pig's mouth, and is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp extremity.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And be your incision in which you incise it for many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not confounded with another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the elevated tooth is exposed to wear and tear, then immediately grind it with a file of Indian iron whose shape is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And be all of Indian iron and the edge slightly worn; and be of many small points like a file with which are made needles, with which the tooth is ground gradually over many days with ease, in order that it may not be confounded with another tooth and decay.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And immediately finish grinding it to the end, and remove it with some rasors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is gnawed and the tongue lies against it, then it is necessary that you grind it down until the sharpness of that fracture is removed and made smooth, and be filled so that the tongue does not lie against it nor corrupt the word.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Thirty-Third Chapter.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to the teeth in front of concussion and removal through percussion or falling, and the patient cannot strengthen over what is gnawed, and you have treated it with medicinal potions, and your treatment has not been effective, then immediately for this reason, so that they do not decay, make a filling of gold and not silver, because silver becomes green and immediately puffs up within some days, but gold is never changed.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the remedy is that you take the filling and double it inside two healthy teeth, and immediately increase the two curvatures of the filling between two damaged ones, or one or many, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And immediately iterate the filling until you reach the part where you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And be your constriction in which you bind the filling to the roots of the teeth so that they do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And immediately incise the superfluous extremities of the filling with forceps or toothed instruments, and add them to each place by gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And immediately release it as straight as possible.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is broken or crumbled, strengthen that one or those with another filling in such a way for all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, tied together as these are bound.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one tooth or two returns to its place and settles in its own location, and they are restored as we have recommended, and remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only good craftsmen and wise ones can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable for some cause of cow's bones, and it is made from them as a form of teeth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth falls, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves that purpose for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the Incision of the Ligament Which Appears in the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which appears behind the tongue sometimes or is natural to it, or accidental and occurs by wound that has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, and raise his tongue, and immediately incise that ligament nerve according to its latitude until the tongue is freed from its recent constriction.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if in that place there is some hardness or denudation, and it is fixed by the consolidation of the wound, then you must take care to cut and divide it according to its latitude until you have severed the ligament and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not a fissure made in the skin of the flesh, lest you cut and divide here, causing an artery to bleed.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And immediately wash the marks of the incision with water or vinegar or with a rough water; and immediately pause, leaving the tongue loose; thus is the method which the patient should leave his tongue in each night so that it may not be consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, pause over the spot with a powdered vermilion; but if the blood flows, then immediately cauterize the spot with a caustic lance which is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately apply that cure to other causes so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of Ranula Under the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes an aposteme forms under the tongue, resembling a small tumor, which prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and very little is magnificent enough to fill up the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation is that you open the patient's mouth, setting it in front of the sun, and consider the aposteme.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a brown or black color, hard as stone, to which the patient does not have any sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is whitish and moist, then you must put the index finger into it, and incise that with a subtle spatula, and cut off all around; and if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then immediately pause above powdered vermilion, which is red ochre, until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately return to your work until you have completed it in the place where you began, washing it with vinegar and salt; and cure that one with another cure suitable for this, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the Extraction of Apostemes from Both Ears and That Which is Nothing in the Neck Gorge and Other Apostemes.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When something develops in the neck gorge, so are the glands which are gathered together, which protrude and are named two ears, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and do not heal, then you must consider if the aposteme is hard, of brown color, without sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that one with iron for the flow of blood; but let that one mature first, and then either you will break it off or it will break off by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, rough, and the root of that one is subtle, then that one must be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation is that you consider, before your operation, if the aposteme of that one has already settled down calmly or if it has diminished by some diminution; and then make the patient sit in front of the sun, with his head in its natural position, and open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of the tongue of that one between his most prominent fingers, holding it with an instrument of noble form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And made of silver or iron, and be subtle like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, as you take hold of that tongue and the aposteme is shown to you, and you gaze upon it with your own eyes, then take an index finger and place that one in the angle, and pull it out towards the outer parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another cause that pulls out some part of the tunics, and then immediately incise it with an instrument whose shape is this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is assembled to forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the inward part of the other, very sharp, which is made of Indian iron well bent.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not with you, then immediately incise that one with a spatula whose shape is this: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one notch, then incise the other one according to this manner of incision, and immediately wash the patient's mouth with rough water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding, wash with water of decoction of mulberry bark or myrtle leaves and similar to those of the stiptic causes until the bleeding is stopped, and then cure that one so that it may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there are other apostemes in the neck gorge, besides those two ears, and incise them according to what I said earlier in the incision of two notches similarly.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I once cured a woman of an aposteme which was born in her neck gorge, which aposteme tended towards brown color, without sensation, which had already closed the neck gorge of hers, and the woman was breathing with great stricture, and had already been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had already come to death's door if I hadn't acted within a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the aposteme had grown so much that it had formed two ridges, almost ready to burst through two canals.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I took hold of the instrument and stuck it in one of them, and pulled that one out, and with it came a great piece, and immediately I incised the other notch of understanding from the other canal, and immediately I opened the patient's mouth, and comprehended her tongue, and immediately I placed the instrument in that aposteme.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And immediately you cut off a great part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the neck gorge of that woman was completely opened, and she began to drink water immediately, and immediately you prescribed food. And I did not stop incising that aposteme many times for a long time, and a successive aposteme grew in its place, which I incised until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I went away and cauterized the neck gorge of her, then added nothing more; and immediately I went on my way, not knowing what God had done to me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the Incision of Hives When They are Apostemed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh settles on the hives, and they are apostemed and long, then it is called perpendicular. And if it is in the part behind large and rounded, and then it is called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and your treatment does not take hold, and the aposteme itself remains, and is subtle, then you must incise that which is aggregated round; and if it reaches that length, and is bloody, of brown color or black, and there is no sensation to it, then you must be afraid of incising it, because in that case there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you incise it according to the manner that I have said, with regard to its whiteness and length, then make the patient sit and take hold of her tongue with an instrument whose shape is this: And immediately place the index finger in the nose, and pull that one down and incise it with one of the two instruments which are said to be for cutting notches.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise it too much, but only up to the natural term without addition, because if you incise too much, you will deprive your patient of speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And immediately after the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two notches, and cure that one until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use force in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of cauterization is only with sharp water, and you must pause the patient's head in its natural position, and immediately press her tongue with the instrument which we have said, and take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and pour that one into it to make it live, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	And the extremity of it should be in the concavity where the medicine is placed, just like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the hives, and the patient should lie on her side for so that the saliva or mucus of the mouth flows into the intrinsically medicated area, so that no other cause falls onto the neck gorge of hers and that it is cured.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And immediately take the medicine and express it onto the hives for the space of about an hour until you see that one to be darkened and calmed by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a canal above until the cloth adheres to that canal, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the hives, and then let it be so that it will dry up and fall off within three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and immediately after cauterization, wash off in the circuit of the hives with a cloth wrapped around the ray, and clean out that one with what is in the circuit of the medicine, and be washed with rough water, and be cured outside with embrocation, and inside with gentle washing until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and longer in its duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	And sometimes the hives are cured with something even more subtle than cauterization and incision, because they are cured by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, chamomile, origanum, rue, Arabic aloes, camomile, and similar herbs to those of the plants, and combine all or some of them into a bath, and let them be submerged in vinegar, and boil; and the bath should be well stirred with a decent stirrer, and there should be a canal in the middle of the bath, above which is placed an instrument made of iron, shaped like this: made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the steam can reach the hives on the tongue, until the hives are somewhat obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And immediately repeat this procedure many times until it is dry, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the development of apostemes, because too much adjustment would occur in the aposteme, and you must not do that, but rather declare the aposteme of that one beforehand.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you don't have this instrument, then take a reed and tie it at the end of the tube to form a bundle of rushes, so that the patient's mouth is closed, because the closing of the rush prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the Extraction of Thorns and of what adheres in the Neck Gorge and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times things stick together in the neck gorge or thorn from a plague or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then it is necessary that you extract what appears from those things on which the eye looks, because you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the neck gorge, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because then the annexed cause of the neck gorge will be forgotten through vomiting; or that you give the patient a piece of bread or a root of lattuga or a bone of dried beef; or take a piece of dry sea sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then have the patient swallow that one, so that when the thorn reaches its place in the neck gorge where it is extracted, then it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take a snake and tie it tightly with thread, and then place it behind and suddenly extract it; or take a pot and suddenly put something in it and then immediately pull it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if what does not appear and is forgotten with those causes which we have said, then take one instrument of lead shaped like this:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a ray, but smaller, and at the end of it there should be a concavity which you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And it should reach the top of the patient's head and be careful not to touch the bone of the throat, because then it will enter into the body and with that which fills up the bone or the thorn, or that one puts its hand on it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But in truth the patient that one inserts is sweet, by reason of its knowledge of the place where the annexed cause lies and fills it up, and pulls out its hand with the instrument on top, all according to the quantity which is prepared beforehand until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Extraction of Bloodstained Matter attached to the Neck Gorge.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the bloodstained matter is medicated with what we have said in the division of cure by medicines and it does not take hold, then consider immediately the neck gorge of the patient at sunrise, because you will have compressed the tongue of him with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you find the bloodstained matter, extract it with a small instrument or subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and insert it into the neck gorge of the patient, and immediately pause in the concavity of the tube an iron instrument heated, and do this many times (until the bloodstained matter is dead and falls out of the neck gorge) and abstain from giving the patient water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And immediately take a full vial of rough water, and open the patient's mouth with that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause pass through it and spit out the water an hour after another by its own hand, because the bloodstained matter will soon get angry when it tastes the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cypress or asafoetida using the instrument which we have recommended for subfumigation of the hives.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and it will fall off in due time.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another manner of operating in the subfumigation of that, which is: take a bowl in which are burning coals and cover the bowl with a cloth in the middle of which is a canal, and shape the end of the instrument in that canal; and then heat the subfumigation above; and have the patient put his mouth into the extremity of the tube, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you know that the subfumigation has reached the bloodstained matter, for the bloodstained matter will soon fall off.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't work, then you repeat the subfumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient water, and make them eat salty and bitter causes, and not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodstained matter is extracted from the neck gorge when it appears; and it resembles forceps like those, but except that there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the neck gorge, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is worn down with lime, so that when you compress any cause, it does not slip away.
Capitol .xl.	Fortieth Chapter.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon in warning against apostemes and in dealing with them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostemes are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of them, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And so diverse in piercing and cutting of them through two manners, of which one is by the species of apostemes in itself; and because they compress the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is proper to the places where accidents of the body occur, because the aposteme that occurs in the head is another from the aposteme that occurs in the backside; and the aposteme that occurs in the fleshy place is another from the aposteme that occurs at the joint; and each one has its own judgment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some of the apostemes which should not be pierced, but rather allowed to mature in those places or complete their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other apostemes which should be pierced when they are crossed, and not mature according to their completion, just as those that are proper to joints, for the aposteme when it comes to a joint is prolonged into what is in the circuit of it, and soon corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that member; or it is an apostema proper to the principal member, and if you delay the piercing of it until it becomes mature on the principal member; or it is proper to the backside, then pierce it unripe; and do not perforate it too deeply by non-completed digestion, but only that which is proper to the backside, so that the pressure of it is relieved and is elongated towards the outer parts of the backside, and a fistula is formed, or it is done in such a way that it is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But it is necessary to know the hour of piercing the aposteme, and thus it is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it has matured when there is the cessation of pain and the ceasing of fever, and immediately after, the diminution of rigor and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the aposteme, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you should know that the piercing should take place in the most distant part of the aposteme and nearest to the cure of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And piercing should be done through the length of the flesh or the body, if the apostemes are in the parts of the muscles or the fats, and in places of the ligaments, of the nerves, of the arteries; and finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the aposteme is in a fleshy place, then it is better to wait until the perforation is confirmed by the digestion of that place according to its completion, as we have said; because if you pierce that one too soon, the body of the patient will be prolonged in suffering and much sorrow, and soon the lips of the patient will become hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some apostemes are pierced according to the latitude of the flesh or the body, as necessity demands, or according to that which the member needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer small piercing, and in large apostemes, great piercing and wide or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the apostemes.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And some are those of the apostemes in which it is necessary to curve the code and make an incision, when it is made so that it remains in a term that has already stopped, just as those that occur in many cases of boils and pimples.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those which are incised with a section having three angles; and of those which is incised like the figure of myrtle leaves, just as those of the apostemes of the hernia.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those which are administered with a round section and a lunar section, and resemble those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that to which there is no such thing as are apostemes of the lion's superficial ones, it is necessary that you pierce it with a superficial or flat piercing only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is necessary when the aposteme is large and has gathered much pus, that you pierce it and do not worry about extracting all the pus at once; having extracted one part, and then sealing the aposteme with another day's passage, and then extracting a larger part, and then making many observations according to graduation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And most especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a woman in childbed, or a child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the exit of pus, and soon the patient dies, and you should operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and accordingly administer your piercing in which you pierce these apostemes, so that you wash away the plagues and consider then whether the plague of the aposteme is small or a flat section; if it is a small one, then you should administer some of the old remedy or poultice; and if the aposteme is great, and the fissures of the piercing are many, then it is necessary that you pause in each hole until they all come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the aposteme is abscessed a part of the code or has been concaved in the circuit, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth or with a thread made from linen cloth, just as when you have torn off cloths or rags, their moisture; and strengthen that for three days; and then proceed to process it and cure the same part with what is needed from the instruments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during the time of your operation, then you should administer rough water and vinegar in which a piece of linen cloth is steeped, and pause that over the place of the bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer remedies and treatments and poultices which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the aposteme is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary that you fill poultices with wine and oil warmed up, and pause those over the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the places are fleshy, then it is necessary that you pause poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this be warm until the third day, just as we have said, and then it is necessary that you loosen the aposteme and wash away that one and administer to its cure what is needed for its healing.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the universal cure of apostemes, but according to the way of distinction which I have said for each and every aposteme in a particular manner, by chapters specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Fortieth Chapter.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of apostemes which come in the code of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the code of the head, small apostemes, and so many species of knots that contain tunics which are at their facts; and the species of theirs are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are pustules, and among those are ones that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those that contain moisture similar to dust, and resembling their own kind; and among those are ones that are lapidean, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, just as you should extract them without causing contrariety to the arteries.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you probe them with an instrument whose form approaches thus, which is called entromes, until you know what contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if what is contained is moisture, then you should incise it with a section according to the length by a superficial section in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begins from the section of the line of .B. to the line of .G. Then as the moisture is evacuated, then you should excoriate that part which contained that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, for many times it returns, if there remains some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And accordingly, submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that which fills the wound and leave it for another day, because by this corrode all that remains of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, repeat the process on that cloth with Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly if it is needed for its healing, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the aposteme contains fatty knots, then you should incise it in this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the form of a cross, and cut once between two lips of the section and scrape off all that part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your arteries make opposition, then do what I have recounted first of all.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the aposteme that is hardened by section and cure according to what we have said; and section on a hardened aposteme is even easier, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times there are certain of these apostemes which are in the head of some men with whom there is no moisture; and this cause is because you have incised upon an aposteme in the head of an old woman and then hardened that aposteme as a deaf, hard, white stone which could not be broken, and if any one should hit it with that, it would hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other apostemes that occur on the head of children and ears, you should not follow this chapter, but rather follow the section for those who have had their ears pierced, but the section for all these is a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the piercing of those from the lower part of them, so that it may be relieved to the body of the pus in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And accordingly, cure those with what is needed for its healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Forty-second Chapter.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these apostemes are found in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which occur in the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all of this scrofula is within its own proper tunic, and just as in the nodes and apostemes of the head, just as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some are lapidean, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not respond to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you see of good disposition in the Tocament, the color of which is manifest is propitious to the color of the code, and it is spread over all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and it is not swollen, then you should incise that one with a superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body, along the line of .G. to the line of .B., and scrape off all that part, and extend two lips of the code with once, or with many times if you need those, just as we have said in the apostemes of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And be more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not adjust to your hand and incision, or worry the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you incise a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from performing the operation, then pause in the wound, and apply a poultice of vinegar or other powders that stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the wound, and leave it until the acute phase of the aposteme is quieted and the wound is softened and begins to be purged.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is abscessed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And accordingly, inquire into what your lord has said indicate if there remains any cause of the other small scrofulas; therefore, incise those and cleanse those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the scrofula a great vein, then it is necessary that you do not incise that scrofula from its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then it is necessary to tie that one with a doubled thread and let that one fall until it drops without causing any harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And accordingly, fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that one.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them together as soon as possible so that there remains no superfluous portion.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you find that there remains a superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you understand how to incise its root, and excise it and administer a suture and that which is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofulas which contain moisture, perforate it with a superficial perforation where you see the location of its maturation, and pause the perforation at the point where the pus is lowest in the body, just as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And accordingly, administer a perforation, with poultices and remedies similar to those, in order that it may corrode what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, when you see that the wound is already cleansed, then you should cure it with ointment of flesh-generating substance until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Forty-third Chapter.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the pilhot of the aposteme which occurs in the groin area.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this section in the pilhot, and none have seen it done by anyone in our land that way.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have scrofula, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the pilhot, because through this, there will be no help for the disease, since all the veins and main vessels of the malady are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have apostemes cutaneous on the mouth or groin or both ears, when the disease is not in the skin, it is necessary to use the section of pilhot to escape the destruction which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want this, it is necessary to incise the pilhot below three circles of the pilhot or four with a small section by latitude in that which is between two circles as much as possible, so that the section is on the cartilage, not on the bone; and this location is convenient for the section, because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are there.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is hesitant, it is necessary that he extend the fold of the groin with once, and accordingly, make an incision in the fold until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And accordingly, incise the ciphac according to what we have recounted; and it is signified on the section of the canal by the flame which is of that essence and with water that is dissolved and by the absorption of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is redeemed in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the fold of the wound, and sew that alone to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And I, Albucasis, say that the summary of this sermon which we have recounted is nothing but to see that some of these apostemes have already filled the groin area of the malady, and the malady has come to death, and the air in it is dried up, and some go to incise the epigloss to make the malady breathe over the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease is consumed; and it is the maliciousness of it for three days; and then I command thus: sew up the wound, and cure that one until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen through my art, is that a servant took a cote and placed it in his groin area and incised with it a part of the lung's canal, and you were called to its cure, and approached the patient as if the dying were crying out, and uncovered the wound and approached the blood which was issuing from the wound slightly.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore you were confessed that it had not been incised to the vein nor guided, and the breath was coming from the wound, and cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And he did not die, but rather returned to better condition in his health within a few days.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the section of the pilhot.
Capitol .xliv.	Forty-fourth Chapter.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on an aposteme which occurs in the groin area outside, and is called a hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This aposteme is known as a hernia of the groin is a great aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, for either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no need to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to grassy nodes, and the other manner is similar to an aposteme made by a node of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to make a conjecture about it except in one that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should proceed with that and investigate it according to the said, and if you find it similar to grassy nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it as with the nodes, and extract it with what contains it of the skin and bursa; and otherwise, then examine all his being, and accordingly cure the place where healing is needed until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Forty-fifth Chapter.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, many species and I have already spoken about all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between a node and an exitura, so that there may be no doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that in an exitura there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is abated; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that ciphac lion which is at the proper sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and it is made thus as if a vacuum, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as you have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, it is necessary that you expose it and inquire about it at the beginning with an instrument which is called an intro-mes, according to its form as will be described in the chapter that is next.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the manner of inquiring about apostemes and all nodes, which is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid part which you find in the apostema, and you rotate those fingers in that way little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And accordingly, lastly, your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the aposteme, and accordingly, extract the intro-mes and consider what is found in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the fluid that has been extracted is forgotten and runs off, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other apostemes.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the wake of the intro-mes there is no fluid, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And cut above it with an incision having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	in this way as I have taught you, and suspend it with once, and excise the core of all parts with ease, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times you will have to put it back together, and accordingly, you should extract it bit by bit until there is no longer any cause from it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Therefore, if there is no longer any cause from it, little or much, the node will return to its original state.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that there remains a small part from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and pause over that which contains the aposteme cautiously, and cure that one from another cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a great node, then you should sew up the two lips of it and cure that one with what engenders.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsating vein is on the opposite side, or non-pulsating, then you should press and humbly the place of the scar that is dry and let it rest for two days or three until the wound is purged and the ebullition of blood has ceased; and accordingly return to incising what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Forty-sixth Chapter.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those which are the forms of intro-mes, and there are three species, one great, one middle-sized, and one small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the great intro-mes is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the middle-sized intro-mes is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small intro-mes is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, with handles of wood or other materials, and with rounded ends to facilitate the instrument's insertion into apostemes.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the expert instruments, and they are named "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three species, one great, one middle-sized, and one small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great expert instrument is this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the middle-sized expert instrument is this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small expert instrument is this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Conveniently, they are used for those apostemes, exituras, and fistulas, and also for buboes, in order to distinguish between those that are of the bones and others caused by other reasons.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And there are made needles, large and small, with heads like great aglets to which the sheaths are sewn, and they are made of horn citron, or bone, or iron, or silver. And the best ones are when they are made of horn citron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And there are made expert instruments of black wood, which are adapted to open up the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections that are reflected into their lightness with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three species, one long, and the others middle-sized, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the great expert instrument of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the middle-sized expert instrument of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small expert instrument of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are of many species, one kind being simple, with only one curvature, and there are three kinds: great, small, and middle-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And among them, some are made of horn, and there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them, some needles have two curvatures, and there are three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them, some needles have three curvatures, and there are three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a great simple needle, this:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a middle-sized simple needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple needle, this:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a great horn needle:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a middle-sized horn needle, this:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small horn needle, this:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a great needle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a middle-sized needle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small needle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a great needle having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a middle-sized needle having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small needle having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and apostemes are cut and scraped, and there are three species, one great, one middle-sized, and one small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a great scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a middle-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not paused in this manner, but rather to make a just judgment in the excoriation of the nodes, lest there be inscision of a vein or nerve, and for that the patient may be healed and attain tranquility, and thus a little peace is found in the adustion of which is sought the excoriation of the aposteme.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of ligatures, and there are three species: great, middle-sized, and small, just like veins.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a great ligature:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a middle-sized ligature:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small ligature:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of horn and resemble a ray, with which an acolymph is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the extremity that is punctated with a spatula hidden and in that corner go out to the outside parts and inside when you want, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers when piercing the apostemes and do not touch the patients, and there are three species: great, middle-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventoses with which the flow of blood is absorbed, and there are three species: great, middle-sized, and small; these are the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of horn citron, rounded with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that you have these three species of ventoses, great, middle-sized, and small, in order to absorb the flow of blood with speed when needed, and accordingly, when first aid is not a medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you should not use those to absorb blood everywhere in the body, and you should only use them in fleshy places, just like in the groins of the thighs and hips, and in the areolae of the breasts, and in the belly and groin areas, and similar to their own fleshy humors.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes they are made of those instruments, small and similar to scissors for flaps according to this form; by which the blood is absorbed when it is cut off through flebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Forty-seventh Chapter.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of men's breasts which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen as they start to be relaxed, and accordingly, the breasts are swollen, and similar to those of women, and aposteme-like, distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for him who has this condition, you should incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and accordingly, excise all the excess skin, and accordingly, fill the wound with an encarnative medicine, and accordingly, adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure that one until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to its natural shape and is softened by its magnitude just like in women, then it should be divided into two parts as far as possible, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one is contained within the other until the end of each one, so that the major line contains the minor one according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. And accordingly, excise the core between the two lips of the wound, and remove the swelling, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders which are necessary for the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the unease of the patient and the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with a cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it until the corrosion that remains from the grayish color is removed, and accordingly, cure that one until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Forty-eighth Chapter.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of apostemes which come after the titillation.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those apostemes that come after the titillation are of the species of scrophulas, hard ones, which contain a skin that is drawn out.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the fluid that is in the apostema has been evacuated, then you should fill it with a piece of well-greased cloth and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, the cloth should be left in place and cured with a suitable ointment for that, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the aposteme is of the species of nodes or scrophulas, then you should divide it as we have said in the section on scrophulas, equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended in such a way that it would be painful to burn, then you should administer in it a cautery according to what we have previously said.
Capitol .xlix.	Forty-ninth Chapter.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of apostemes that occur by artery or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the cord which is over it is consolidated, many times a post-hemorrhagic aposteme occurs. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and aposteme are due to an artery or vein: for when the apostema is due to an artery, it becomes long and swollen in the breast of the chest; and when you compress the apostema with those very words, you will feel a stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein is rounded on the surface of the chest.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this apostema is an error, and more so in those who are left with abscesses, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the chest; and it is very great, therefore its cure by iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But on that which is due to them by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, you should divide the section in the cord along its length; and accordingly, you should cut through the section with scissors and approach the artery, and deliver the tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And accordingly, you should tie that thread and make it pass through the other side, and tighten the artery with a double suture in two places, — which causes you to see ahead in extracting two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And accordingly, you should push the location which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is released and the aposteme is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, you should administer the cure in which fire is generated until the ligaments fall off; and accordingly, you should cure that one with suitable ointments for that until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the aposteme is due to section of a vein, then you should take hold of it with your hand and water as much as possible from the aposteme with the cord, and accordingly, insert the needle left of the location which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that file double so that you can extract that one from the other side, and accordingly, tie the aposteme with a good ligature according to what we have said about tying two parts together with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then accordingly, insert the needle with that thread left of all the aposteme and make the first incision with the needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And accordingly, cut the aposteme in the middle of it until when that which is in it is released, then you should incise the excess cord, and leave what is tied to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, pause over the powder which you have mixed with vinegar and oil, and accordingly, administer the cure which is made with some and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	First Chapter on the Aposteme that occurs due to Torsion of Nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an aposteme occurs in the artery and vein, so also an aposteme occurs in the nerves when it is caused by percussion or excessive labor, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made the most in the places of the assistants or anklebone, or in any place where the joints are disturbed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a great aposteme, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in the major parts of the body disposed to their own kind, when it is tightened with vehemence, and one feels in oneself like a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an aposteme that grows in the breast of the body, and therefore it remains without cord, and it is hurtful to all parts and does not go to any parts before or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to be treated with iron, because very little would lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or forehead should be treated with cord and spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small aposteme, then you should treat that one with poultices and abscesses.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then you should suspend that one with stitches, and excise it, and accordingly, stop that flow; and adjust the wound with suture, and cure that one until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Fifty-first Chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the Section on the Aposteme that occurs due to Childbirth, which occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Hereafter I shall describe to some men many times in the bellies of those and in other parts of the bodies of those which are called fungals by similarity with those like fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head is thick; and already their lips are converted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I myself have seen one, and in the belly of it were two theils which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between them white, with fine roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already their lips were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise them and bury one in a pit that weighs 18 pounds. and the other weighed 6 pounds.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in incising them is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the thiel is white, humid, with fine roots; then you should incise it with a spatula late, and be present while cauterizers are in the fire, because many times the section of it is expelled with much blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize that one.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is pale and tremulous, beware of incising with iron; but then take a lead thread freshly made, and tie it to that thiel, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And accordingly, adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead very much for that thiel, until it is abscessed and falls off by itself through excessive labor.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the thiel is of coarse roots, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and terror, and most especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But possible is that you incise most of it, and accordingly, cauterize that one so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And accordingly, cure that one until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to incise a thiel which is of dark color, little sensation, and little regard, for that one is a cancerous tumor.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will remember an account of cancer accordingly.
Capitol .lii.	Fifty-second Chapter.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the Cure for Eminence of the Navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Eminence of the navel is caused by many reasons; either by fissures in the cicatrix which is on the abdomen, and eyes of it are torn or burst forth according to what develops in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery, as was said before, or by ventosity constricted in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to fissure of the cicatrix and bursting forth of the membrane, then the color of the aposteme is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and accordingly, it appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to bursting forth of the membrane, then the situation of that one with water as we have recounted, but with a more violent diversity, and when you press that one with the threads said, it is hidden, and accordingly, it returns; and very little remains in it, and it is magnified much by the introduction of bath and violent labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to humidity, then there is no pain and it is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constrained or creased.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then accordingly, the signs appear to decline towards blackness with that aposteme.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to flesh nothing, then accordingly, the aposteme is great, thick and hard, and it grows in a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to ventosity, then accordingly, the touch of it is gentle.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider whether the eminence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or ventosity; then you should be prohibited from curing it, because there is fear and terror alike as I have taught you in the chapter where I said about apostemes by artery and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the navel is due to the membrane or the skin, then you should command the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; and accordingly, make a sign in the circuit of all the navel, and accordingly, command him to stand forward between your hands above his belly button, and accordingly, encircle with a spatula late in the circuit of the navel over the location which you have marked with the sign; and accordingly, extend most of the aposteme to the upper parts with a thread great; and accordingly, tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or cord and the manner of tying decent.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And accordingly, cut the middle of the extended aposteme over the ligament and insert the said thread into that indicated and seek out the membrane; and if you have not found nor guarded by the ligament, then you should extract the remaining part and push the membrane to the lower parts outside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have cut the membrane, then accordingly, take that one with a thread; and incise the excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then accordingly, surround that one with much, and accordingly, return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and insert two needles into the circuit which you have made around the aposteme in a cross-like manner, so that they penetrate; and accordingly, strengthen the aposteme in four parts above the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the location until the stretched skin relaxes and falls off by itself; or incise that one when it is softened and can be peeled away, and accordingly, cure that one with water as needed, until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence of the navel is due to flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then accordingly, you should conquer the aposteme as we have said and extract the blood or humidity which you find there, and accordingly, cure that one with water as needed and consolidate the location.
Capitol .liii.	Fifty-third Chapter.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the Cure for Cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division, of what kind of cancer it is and how it is treated with medicines, and that it is a savior in its cure with iron because it is not ulcerated; and we have said that cancer is generated through carelessness and caution in its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, such as breast cancer or womb cancer and to their likeness of members allotted to remove all that, and most especially when it is beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is ancient and great, you should not dare to touch it, because I have not seen anyone heal from it nor has anyone else seen another case, nor is there any precedent for reaching that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in that case is when it is allotted as we have said, which is to precede and leave the patient and purge with black bile some times, and accordingly, sign him, if there is a manifest repulsion.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And accordingly, prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located for the operation, and accordingly, prohibit the use of those threads which are needed for that; and accordingly, concave from all parts with a good cord excitation so that there remains no cause for the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And accordingly, let the blood flow and do not abscess it slightly, and express the places, and wash away the gross blood with your hand or with an instrument which is at your disposal among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is great contrariety of blood incised from the vein or artery, then accordingly, cauterize that one until the flow of blood is ceased, and accordingly, cure that one with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Fifty-fourth Chapter.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the Cure for Hydrocephalus.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted in the division, the species of hydrocephalus caused by water and the signs of each species, and the cure for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that one which is cured with iron is only the species of athleta alone, and it is not approached by iron to the species of tympanic or to the species of hypsarchus, for this is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydrocephalus tympanic with medicines and not confirmed your medication, then accordingly, consider, for if the patient has already been weakened by it, or is suffering from another disease or hydrocephalus, just as if it is in the head or chest and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate it with iron, for fear is over that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of great virtue and with no other disease but hydrocephalus alone, and not a child or an old person, then accordingly, the manner of the operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and minister to it accordingly by expressing the belly of it with your own hand, filling the water into the part left of the pentynal, and accordingly, take a spatula with spines according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	with two sharp parts long, with an acute extremity just like a spatula; but however, be in it some smallness gradually, by reason that in the operation with that one you do not pass into the membrane, and lead that one.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And accordingly, consider if the generation of hydrocephalus is from one of the membranes, because then you should at that section remove yourself from the navel by the quantity of three times to the parts left, on the right side of it above the pentynal.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocephalus is due to disease of the liver, then accordingly, your section will be on the left side of the navel by three times.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to melancholy, then accordingly, your section will be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary that your section be above the ribcage on which the patient lies, in order that the excesses do not flow to that location freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And accordingly, perforate with the instrument all the cord, and accordingly, insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the cord and the siphon, and you excise that one; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or thereabout.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And accordingly, perforate the cicatrix until the spatula reaches the location where you want to find it, and it is the location of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And accordingly, extract that one and insert an instrument with which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or of iron or of lead lion, at which the lower part is a small hole, and on both sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is incised according to the manner of a feather, just as I have said:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the uppermost part of it is a shell, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that one will suddenly descend upon the instrument, so as to evacuate from the water in equal proportion, for if you evacuate more than what is needed at that hour, the patient may soon die by resolution of their animal spirit, or you may cause harm to them which is close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from that one according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the patient's virtue, of the pulse of it, and of the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And accordingly, extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it to be retained because then it is being held back by the cord which retains the hole that is on the cicatrix of which I have said to you that you should perforate that one according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And accordingly, repeat the instrument at another day if the patient tolerates this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do so for some days on account of fear, and beware of error until there remains only a little water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient and leave a great quantity of water, then accordingly, cure that one by burial in hot sand, and mix it with sour wine and let it stay at the sun's warmth for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the gallbladder and liver accordingly, with the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in this which comes before.
Capitol .lv.	Fifty-fifth Chapter.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the Cure for Children Whose Bladders Do Not Perforate.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born with the bladder of their mother's womb and the head of their mixture not perforated (or is a small hole or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore it is necessary to cauterize with perforation of it as soon as it is born with a spatula very fine according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And accordingly, pause in the hole a small clamp of lead and tie it, and let it be for three days or for four times.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they wish to urinate, it will be remade and harnessed; and accordingly, return that one.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not let it close.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that one from which the hole is small should be treated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for many days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are affected with this, which is because of these, that one who is born and grows is at the end of the head of the urethra, so that it cannot urinate to the lower parts, until it raises the urethra with its own hand to the upper parts; and it is not a generation, therefore the sperm cannot reach the mother's womb according to rectitude, and it is a bad illness indeed.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in this is that the patient should be bent over their own back, and accordingly, extend the head of the urethra with your left hand with a violent extraction, and incise the head of the head of the urethra at the location of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as one would incise with a feather, or if you remove some part, so that the middle of it will resemble the head of the urethra and the hole will fall into its middle place according to what is needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times this happens; and pause yourself at the location where you incise the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Fifty-sixth Chapter.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the Phimosis Which Occurs in the Prepuce at the Head of the Urethra and Corruption, Blackness, and Adherence of the Prepuce at the Head of the Urethra.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this phimosis occurs in the urethra and is an excessive growth of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant, and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not-malignant, requires that you suspend with a thin thread and excise it until all the flesh is removed; and accordingly, pause over that part submerged in Egyptian ointment; and accordingly, cure it with divine oil until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the phimosis is malignant, of bad color, then accordingly you must administer cauterization according to the incision of it and the ratio of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the phimosis is in the prepuce of the head of the urethra not circumcised, and one part of the phimosis is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then accordingly you must excise the phimosis which is inside first until it is consolidated; and then you will cure that outside, for when you cure it together with the prepuce, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And already it happens in the genitals and in the prepuce blackness and corruption, therefore it is necessary that you cover all this which has already been denigrated and which already wants to corrupt or which has already corrupted; and accordingly, apply a liniment on top of it with honey, which has been mixed with the meal of scoria of millet and of errors trampled and crushed.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And accordingly, cure that one with another cure until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is excessive bleeding, then accordingly administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because the cauterizing juice is at two dispositions together, that is, to bleeding and to the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the urethra is corroded and destroyed entirely at once, then accordingly it is necessary that you insert into the meat of the prepuce a lead cannula so that the patient may urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce with the head of the urethra (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose prepuce is sound and no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) it is necessary that you excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the urethra is freed from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excise those things exactly, then accordingly you must excise with a spatula some cause of the head of the urethra and the prepuce, and thus is why the prepuce, when it is subtle, is perforated by its subtlety little by little.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And accordingly, separate between the prepuce and the head of the urethra with a thread so fine that it is already moistened in water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And accordingly, be cured with a gentle remedy until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Fifty-seventh Chapter.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the Circumcision of Children and the Cure for that Which Occurs in Them Due to Circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds: but rather, since it is our operation and our will, and its purpose is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to it the better operation and way of least harm, losing sight of health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision in any of their free works, for they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which is why you have found that most of the artists and barbers use to circumcise and cleanse with novacula and torores; and they use a thread with a needle and incision with the fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already forbidden all these ways and did not find better cleansing with forceps, with thread and needle that in cleansing like the fingernail, because many times you have found the cord above, because the cord of the prepuce has two tunics, and remains the tonic more loose, and soon it is forced to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the cleansing that is made by aphthas, and is digressive, of which the bakers use, it is not secure to make an incision at the extremity of the male member, because soon it will enter into the groove of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a fingernail, soon iron will obstruct and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the cleansing that is done with forceps and threads with a needle, the goodness, experimentally discovered by me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness above is like the sharpness below; and thus when you press your hand in proportion to two sharpnesses, and incise accordingly according to a comparison at one time; and it is made compression of the needle with a figure containing the cord of the urethra from all parts, with which there is no error whatsoever.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should cause the child to be in a state of slight numbness, if it understands a little bit, so that you do not make more than just guide the needle into its urethra as much as possible, and let it stay there until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And accordingly, make that child happy in all that manner which is possible to you as much as it receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And accordingly, make that child stay between your hands very well prepared and not at all frightened; and conceal the forceps in your hand or let them lie on your foot, so that the child does not see those nor anyone else of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And accordingly, insert your hand into the urethra and blow on the cord, and pull that one until it reaches the head of the urethra, and accordingly, cleanse that which is attached to it in a sordid manner.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And accordingly, tie the marked place with a double thread, and accordingly, bind a small piece below it with another thread, and accordingly, hold it with the said pous and indicate the location of the thread left behind with good retention, and incise between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, lift the cord little by little and extract the head of the urethra; and accordingly, let the blood flow slowly, because it is better; and pause powder above and on top of the powder, and put a cloth over it in which there is spread a mixture of honey mixed with rose oil that has been recently cooked in water and olive oil; and leave it on it until the next day; and cure it with a remedy until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for cleansing, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Should be the outer tips not cutting and the other ones cutting, so that there is no stick of the key, and should be the length of both edges as much as the length of two handles evenly.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in cleansing is that soon you will escape the entire intrinsic cord or a part of it through incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should stretch that one with your hour and your fingernail in front of the wound's apostema at the location, and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then accordingly extract it with a thread and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the apostema remains behind the urethra, then accordingly you should leave it until the apostema is cauterized, and excise that one with facility, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the urethra, for it will not tolerate this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, cure that one with the water which consolidates the wound with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised with the cord according to measure, and obeys the parts above, this will not hurt at all.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, cure that one with the water which we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Fifty-eighth Chapter.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the Cure for Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made through fear or pain or congealed blood, or through pressure or fleshiness, and similar to those we have said of the manners of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of it to be due to fear which is already in the neck of the bladder, then accordingly the patient should be encouraged over their own fears.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And accordingly, lay the patient's weight on their own back and stretch their belly from the part above their back, and the patient should strain their arm as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, accordingly the neck of the bladder is constructed for the expulsion of fear from the parts behind, so that the urine is absorbed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, and the cause of it is violent on the patient, then accordingly you must administer extraction from him with an instrument which is called syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be a subtle lion's claw, like a goose quill with subtlety of length in similarity to a palm and half, with a fine thread at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of extracting urine with that is to take a double thread and insert it into the extremity of the lana or cotone for good binding; and then you will put the extremities of the thread into the part behind the ciringua, and incise with forceps if there is any superfluous cause in the thread, but introduce it into the canula with vehemence And accordingly, put the ciringua in order with border and album of honey.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And thus let the patient sit on a stool, and envelop the bladder of him with oil of olive, and water and aqua.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And accordingly, introduce the ciringua with facility into the root of the urethra; and accordingly, double the urethra above at the part of the abdomen; and accordingly, push the ciringua into that one, and accordingly, push it until it reaches the bladder, and so the patient will be brought to the cause, and not made in this way according to this order, but rather the meat in which goes to twisting.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And accordingly, stretch the thread with the linen little by little, because the urine will saturate the linen.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And accordingly, extract that and make it for urine cure, and use the ciringua, do not cease to do so and use the ciringua until the bladder is evacuated and the patient attains relief.
Capitol .lix.	Nineteenth Chapter.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the Quality of Cathartics for the Bladder with Clamp-cedra and similar instruments which are in accordance with this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or apostema occurs in the bladder, or congealed blood is present there, or it is narrowed by pressure, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then accordingly it should be made with an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but in the extremity of it, it is soundless, that is to say, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that one are three holes: two on one side, just as often times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a concave place, in which water is poured, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, until when some cause is drawn from it with the humidities, it should be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with water it should be drawn out, and when it is long, as the clampcedra does, which is filled with naptha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to procure humidities in the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out with it the water that is poured above, because the humidity is drawn out into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And accordingly, introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the urethra, according to what we have recommended in the ciringua; and accordingly, pour in the humidity with water, because that humidity comes to the bladder soon, and the patient will be relieved.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the Subtle Catheter by which the Bladder is Catheterized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, the head of which is similar to a small feather, and behind it there is a thread-like ligament.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And accordingly, take the bladder of motion, and put in it the humidity that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and accordingly, tie it between two with a strong ligature made of double thread, and heat up that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And accordingly, insert the extremity of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And accordingly, press your hand on the bladder with the humidity and stretch down into it until the patient feels that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder present, then accordingly take a bag of parchment and make from it a circle; and perforate that one all around its circumference; and accordingly, insert a strong thread into those holes, just as they are revolved; and accordingly, add the circle just as it is added also, so that you pour into that which you want of the humidities, oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And accordingly, tie that one to the instrument and do with it just as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Sixtieth Chapter.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the Extraction of Fear.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of fear and its cure with medicines, and the difference between fear generated in the lungs and fear generated in the bladder, and its signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said the fear in which cutting operation is made with hand, and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the fear generated in the bladder properly is that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you narrate it with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that the fear generated in the bladder is mostly seen in children; and its signs are that the urine that comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it like sand; and the patient feels their urethra, and often times they cry out, and accordingly is dressed; and with this, you see for yourself how these things come about.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is laughable to see the healing of children from that until they have reached 14 years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young ones, it is milder because it is among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which fear is greater and cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that one to cleanse the patient with a catheter which extracts all the fissure that is in their gutters; for that fissure sometimes prevents the entry of fear into the bladder.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And accordingly, the patient should be pressed with their own weight and be compressed and tightened in such a way that fear descends to the bottom of the bladder, or else it jumps from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And accordingly, make that one sit between your most prepared hands, and the most of it are left in its things, so that the bladder is made to decline into the parts behind.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And accordingly, take care of that one and all that is outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel fear in the space, then accordingly you should sit down immediately with section upon it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it is not entirely gone, then accordingly you should take some oil and anoint your left hand with it, if the patient is a child, or a little oil if they are a full-grown young person, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And take care of the fear until it stays behind your said indication.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And accordingly, convert that one little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And accordingly, press upon that one with your said indication, and push it out into the parts outside the place from which you took section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their right hand; and command another assistant to extend the legs above into the parts with their left hand, and with their other hand to relax the cord which is behind the legs, in the part where the section is being made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And accordingly, insert the spatulum, as follows is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut in it as far as the distance between the anus and the legs, not in the middle location, but before the left side of the cleft; and make the section on that fear and your said indication be in the anus, and make it a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and behind tight according to the quantity that you have extracted from the fear as possible, and not greater, because then the pressure would compress your said indication which is in the anus, and it would be forgotten with difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from the fear is some which has an angle and corners, for which the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that one, there is a part resembling a grain of flint, which is rounded and made for easier extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that one with angles and corners, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not like that, then accordingly you should gently press upon it, or that you stretch upon it with decent gestures, the extremity of which should be as a file with which you stretch upon fear, and do not remove from it; or that you insert behind it a subtle instrument with curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot upon it, then accordingly you should enlarge the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off in strength with vitriol thrice strained.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the fear is more than one, then accordingly at first you should guide your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and accordingly insert upon it; and accordingly guide a little further ahead; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the fear is very great, then accordingly ignorance is that you insert that one with great section, for it happens to the patient either death or confusion of the continued distillation of urine, so that the place is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But manage expulsion from it until it is forgotten, or generate in the fracture of it with forceps until it comes out in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then accordingly fill the wound with the sap of aloe and the blood of dragon, and strengthen that one.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause over that cloth dipped in oil and vinegar, or in rosy oil and water, so that the suppuration may be checked.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And accordingly, repose the patient on their back, and do not release the bandage for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have released that one, bathe the wound with water and some oil, and accordingly cure it with dayphonic ointment and diabolic ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound an apostema occurs, which is cautious and corroding, and from it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder with urine, and by that the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the efflux of blood with urine), then accordingly insert your said indication into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will provoke the bladder to corruption and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all species, with that which is needed for the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And take care in all hours of the entire cure that you look after both the wounds and adjust the medicines which are paused over the place.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the fear is small and is in the meat of the urethra, and it is stuck in there, and urination is prohibited, then accordingly cure that one with what you previously recommended before reaching section, for many times this cure will be accused of section; and now I have tried this, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron alfelut, the form of which is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular extremity, sharp, stuck into a stick.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And accordingly, take a thread and tie it to the urethra behind the fear, so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And accordingly, insert the iron into the urethra, perforating with ease until the perforator reaches that fear.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And accordingly, rotate the perforator with your hand in that fear little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make it pass to the other side penetrate; for then the urine is soon absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And accordingly, press your hand upon that which remains of the fear from the part outside of the urethra, for that is twisted, and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not suitable for you due to some cause which prohibits it from that, then accordingly tie a thread below the fear, and another thread above the fear.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And accordingly, encircle the fear in that urethra between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And accordingly, extract that one.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And accordingly, release the ligature and purify the congealed blood which is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the fear, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligament above, for when the thread is released close to the extraction of the fear, the cord returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary for you when you tie the thread above, that you raise the cord to the upper parts, or else you should return your said indication and cover the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Sixtieth Chapter.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the Extraction of Fear in Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Fear in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if fear occurs in some of those, then accordingly the cure is difficult and prohibited by many manners.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman very quickly becomes shamefaced.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe if she has been deceived by her husband when he is chaste, or is one of those women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with my hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section on fear in women is far from the location of the fear, so you need a deep section, and in it there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity provokes you to this, then accordingly it is necessary that you take a woman who is well known and not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that one, then accordingly look for another who is quiet and subtle, or present a mature woman well-versed in the nature of women, or a woman who has been trained in this art apart from the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present that one and command them to do everything you will tell them, from the inquisition of fear to the beginning; which cause is that they look if the woman is shamefaced, then accordingly it is necessary that they put their said indication into her anus and seek out the fear.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find that one, cut it off below your said indication, and then command them to insert upon it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not shamefaced, then accordingly command the matron to insert her said indication into the privates of the patient and inquire about the fear, since she pauses her left hand over the bladder, and compress that one with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find that one, then accordingly it is necessary to gradually push her through the orifice of the bladder into the parts behind with the summit of her virtue until she reaches the root of the cleft.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And accordingly, insert upon that one the opposition of the greatest part of the privates, to the root of the cleft of some part being in a position and centring the fear in that part, and the said indication not being removed from the fear cut off below.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be slight at first; and accordingly, insert a ray upon that section, and if you feel the fear, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know that the fear will be extracted from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the species of fear are many: for some are slight and great, and lion-like and rough, and long and rounded, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many species there are of it for this reason that you signify on that which you will.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust to the place with vitriol thrice strained and let it be for an hour until the blood is stopped, and then return to your operation until the fear is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare with you the instruments which are said in the extraction of fear in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the instrument that is inserted, then accordingly you pause powder on the place and strengthen that with powders and strictures descending, and do not iterate this; and leave the fear and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And accordingly, cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the acuity of blood is ceased after some days, and the place becomes quiet, then accordingly you return to your operation until the fear is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Sixty-second Chapter.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of Section on Hernia Accursed.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia accursed is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane which is below the cord of the genitals containing the humor, and it is called ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper panniculus which nature has prepared in the part of the humor, so that it is covered with another humor; and it is the cord of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not this but rather a kind of tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, so that it pours out this material into them; and sometimes it occurs due to blows inflicted on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has many colors, for its color is declining to citrine or sanguine, or red, or it is black feculent, or white watery, and it is this that is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is so: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then accordingly the apostema is rounded declining a little towards length thus resembling a figure of humor, and appears the genitals, for the humidity contains that in all part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then accordingly the apostema is rounded with a part of humor and by that one estimates it to be another humor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white membrane, then accordingly it is caught below the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the cognition of the color of the moisture, then accordingly you examine the color of the moisture in the apostema with the surrounding area of which the form is preceded; and according to this that is situated in the vestige of the surrounding area, judge what it is deduced from.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then accordingly it is necessary that we command the patient to be flayed and botomed if this is possible for you, and fill his body full.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And accordingly, be reposeful on your back on some cause a little above, and pause below with many cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And accordingly, set yourself on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right side of him, who should stretch his arm to one of two sides to the cord of the genitals and to the part of the miraculous wound in the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And accordingly, take a spatula late and cut the cord of the genitals from the middle to the length, so that it is close to the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And accordingly, make the section according to rectangular equality, at a distance from the line that you should follow along the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white membrane comprehending.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And accordingly, scrape it away, and observe, and take care that you do not insert it; and your scraping with which you scrape it away by part below so that it is suspended in the humor most and subtly scrutinize the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And accordingly, pierce the white membrane full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And accordingly, separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the membrane to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the genitals comprehending, and insert the membrane in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And accordingly, insert that one with its totality or in pieces, and mostly your subtle parts, for if you do not scrutinize the insertion of it exquisitely, there is no certain guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the humor proceeds from that outside of its cord in the time of your operation, then accordingly when you have completed the section of the membrane, return to the inside of it, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suturing, and accordingly cure that one as well as the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the humor corrupted by another disease, then accordingly it is necessary that you cut out the vessels which are sour to the suspender, and extract the humor, and accordingly cure that one with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is aggregated in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it appears to be one operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And accordingly, you wash the blood, and immerse in the sections wool submerged in oil or red oil; and pause outside another wool which you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread that one over two genitals and the miraculous wound in the belly; and pause above folded cloths and powder, and tie those above with a knot according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and accordingly, there are pressed two cloths and they are filled with wool carded according to this likeness; and the extremities are made with those which are bound with cloth or wet wool, and they are added with stricture in the codpiece of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes from the cleft to the back, and the other takes at the part of the navel, and two extremities on two cresses below and two extremities above on two groins, and all the structure is adjusted in the codpiece of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with caustic in place of section with iron; and it is that you take caustic cutlery subtle and insert it into the cord of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recounted until the white membrane containing the water is revealed, and then you take caustic according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is gathered in Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And accordingly, pierce into that membrane, and ignite until all the humidity is exhausted.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And accordingly, extend the membrane with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with caustic subtile ignited; and insert that one according to what is possible for you until it eradicates all of it; and take care not to let the water touch the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more safe and more lengthy of blood flow, and better than the operation with section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you feel contrariety of apostema in the hour of section or in the hour of cauterization, or blood flow, then accordingly it is necessary that you cure which contrariety does to you by this means, with the care which corresponds to him according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is pale and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then accordingly administer perforation according to what we have said here; and it is when you are certified by this that you know, according to what we have said about the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then accordingly you should make the patient sit on some elevated platform, and accordingly pierce the apostema in the lowest part of him with a spatula late, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make it wide so that all the water is drained out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And accordingly, pause on the location of the knot and tie it and leave it so that the remaining water flows out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And accordingly, cure that one until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is contrariety to the egress of water in that hour, then you should pierce it: and this is not done unless by this reason, because the white panniculus at the orifice of the wound causes contrariety and prohibits the exit of water; accordingly, it is necessary that you put into the wound a probe or instrument with which the water is extracted from the drops, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the position of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and is aggregated accordingly after about two months or so; and as it is aggregated, then it should be pierced according to that manner, because the patient will thus pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Sixty-third Chapter.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Section on Carnous Hernia and its Cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of being lost through destruction in the major dispositions; for which my sight has seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are well-remembered to operate in that and the species of apostemes.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So I say that the apostemes are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is made so by many causes: or by acute and severe superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by blows.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is not found in him pain, and it is a grave aposteme.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very little is the aposteme calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no sentiment to it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is made by concretion of the arteries, and by inflammation of those vessels so that already the recollection of it is perceived, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is due to inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the aposteme when you compress it with those said ties; and there is no need for it to touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is due to inflammation of veins is not dispersed from it for any cause, even if compressed with the said ties.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species, a section be made and on the other fleshy parts; and it is that you insert the cord of the genitals, and accordingly extend the humor to the upper parts, and extract that from the white membrane, and deliver the suspensor of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensor more than you deliver it from all part of the parts of the humor.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the humor is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then accordingly it is necessary that you extract the humor and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the membrane or between what is between the vessels, then accordingly it is necessary that you deliver all that adhesion and insert that one by rounded insertion.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is natural flesh behind the adhesion, then accordingly it is necessary that you insert all that which is of him, and extract the humor thus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, then accordingly fill the wound with wool impregnated in red oil and wine; and accordingly cure that one with another care until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Sixty-fourth Chapter.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the Cure of Hernia which is of Vine.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an aposteme wrapped in some wrapping resembling a shoot with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult for the patient to move, exercise, and walk.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this disease it is by fear due to that which is preceded by recollection.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary that we say operation in that according to what I did with the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to make the patient sit on an elevated platform; and accordingly, pinch the suspensor of the testicles at the left side; and accordingly, take hold of the cord of the genitals with the said ties and vessels which are proved to be tender to the verge; and have another minister who you, and stretch those ones with great extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And accordingly, insert by spatula late and make a cross section in the right of the vessels so that the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And accordingly, scrape off all part as we have said in extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And accordingly, put an awl in those places where it is faithful double, and tie that one at the first of the locations where Vit occurs, and tie that other time at the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And accordingly, insert those in the middle location by right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And accordingly, cure the wound with the care of other wounds in which you wish to be born and generated by so that the vessels may not flow from one of two genitals, for it is not evil because of this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if Vit occurs in all the vessels, then accordingly it is necessary that either the testicles be extracted or that the testicles by this are blocked with the vessels, so that they may be deprived of all nourishment by the obstruction of the vessels, and be putrid, or that it happens because there is no further use with those.
Capitol .lxv.	Sixty-fifth Chapter.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the Cure of Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is due to section that extends in the membrane stretched over the belly from the sides of the miraculous wound of the abdomen, so that the intestines being torn away fall into one of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the membrane or of excess of fluid, and occurs in these two species due to many causes: or percussion, or by blow, or by shout, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is when it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an aposteme that grows within the ventral area, because the membrane compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it occurs due to section of the membrane, because at first it causes sudden and vehement pain; and it is an aposteme that appears differently below the apparent cord given off, and this is due to effusion of the intestine, and the body of it in the parts outside the membrane.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine's cloth, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia cirrhal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by ventosity, and sometimes it runs in the intestinal fissure, and here it is retained, and it is in this great perniciousness of the patient, and sometimes it causes evil pain and mostly when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of this disease with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the caustic in that one.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of that one is to command the patient to turn out the intestine with his own hand to the outer parts of his own conquest if he obeys his returnment, and accordingly it should be inserted over his own back between your own shoulders, and lift up the legs of him.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And accordingly, straighten the cord which binds the cord of the testicles to the upper parts, and insert the cord of the testicles all along; and accordingly, put it in two lips of the section, according as you need to open the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is done according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget about that one's humor.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And accordingly, scrape off that membrane which is below the cord of the testicles, until the white hard membrane is revealed from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then accordingly you put your said tie in that which secures the testicle, in that which is between the white membrane and the one that is below the cord of humor, and between the second membrane, and absolve with that adherence which is in the back part of the humor.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And accordingly, take hold of the cord of the testicles with your left hand and extend the white membrane on its side, and lift up the humor with the membrane to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search for those ties which make sure that there is no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard membrane.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause in it, then accordingly you will pinch that one below to the belly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And accordingly, take a needle with a thick faith of ten faiths, and enter that which should be the last of the membrane, which is below the cord of the testicles, which is the section; and accordingly, insert the extremities which emerge from the faith until they are four faiths, and accordingly, compose some of them into a figure in the manner of a cross; and tie with that one the membrane of which we have said that it is below the cord of the testicles with strong bonding of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And accordingly, envelop the extremities of the faiths and tie them with strong bonding until some of the vessels that nourish those cannot transmit any cause by which from here an aposteme would not occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another tie binding according to the first binding, distant from that one by three ties; and accordingly, leave those two bindings with the membrane which is below the cord of the testicles, in the quantity of the greatness of that said, and insert all the remaining part according to roundness, and stop the humor.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And accordingly, insert into the part below of the cord of the testicles by section of which blood and pus should flow as we have recounted in this place that we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And accordingly, administer wool soaked in oil, and pause on the wound; and administer the binding which we have recounted (and sometimes the white membrane is cauterized, which we have said should be done with caution to prevent flux of blood, for many times those things occur) and let the binding settle until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the caustic of that one is delayed, then accordingly cold water should be applied, and pause over it until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, cure the wound with the other care of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Sixty-sixth Chapter.
De hernia ventosa.	Of Ventral Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it is not seen that there has been any boldness in the cure of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is made as we have recounted in the hernia which is with vinegar; which is that you tie the vessels accordingly to the section on that one with facility of it; and accordingly, cut off in the middle place around the aposteme with water which works that, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Sixty-seventh Chapter.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the Disruption which is made in the Angulations.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the angulations as we have said, and emerges from the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is no need for the genitals to have any cause of the intestines at the genitals; and if there is, it is rare; and returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged in this way, a fissure is adjusted in the membrane so that the intestine descends into the membrane; and this occurs because of the extension of the membrane which is in the angulations as we have said, which cause is because the membrane is stretched and the place becomes apostematized and emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is with a caustic as was preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your own shoulders, and accordingly, cuts off the place of the rupture of the apostemes emerging by section through the width according to the quantity of three ties.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And accordingly, strengthen the white membrane that is below the cord until it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And accordingly, take a ray and pause it on the elevated place of the membrane, and press that one against the womb of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And accordingly, close the two elevated places on the extremity of the ray of the membrane, and adjust them with a suture one to another.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And accordingly, extract the extremity of the ray, and do not insert it into the membrane completely, nor extend the humor, nor any other cause as you should know to be in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And accordingly, cure that one with the care of wounds, and as you insert the threads, purify it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the membrane is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Sixty-eighth Chapter.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is feared the reckoning of it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for that one who is treating the case to make the patient lie on his back, and insert all the cord which has been softened over the natural cord; and accordingly, adjust two lips with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut off in the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And accordingly, insert between the sutures; and accordingly, cure through the cure of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Sixty-ninth Chapter.
De castracio.	Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by reason it has been granted to me to recall it in this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except for two manners, of which one is because of the science of the doctor when he is questioned about it, so that he may know the cure of it which occurs; and the other manner is that many times we have needed castration of other beasts for our uses through those animals, such as mares, oxen, and pigs, and similar to beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two manners: or by attrition, or by incision by section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast lie in cold water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And accordingly, take those with your own hand until they are resolved and do not appear to leave any touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And accordingly, tie the suspenders, and insert one section over each humor until two humors process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And accordingly, insert those so that you will have whatever is excoriated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on the membrane of the cord, but only the subtle membrane which is above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this manner of castration is better which is done by attrition, because attrition gently leaves no cause of the testicles so that the beast desires to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Seventieth Chapter.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodism in men is according to two manners: one is when a figure appears in that space which is between the cord of testicles, in which there are two testicles as if they were joined together like a woman's genitals.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from that one flows urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women it is a species: and it is that the woman's clitoris above the pubes is like two male testicles, a little bit small, and at the top part, just as the male urethra and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: two of men and one of women's.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you must insert those adjusted flesh parts so that they flee from the pressure of that one, and accordingly, cure those with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine flows which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Twenty-first Chapter.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of Lentigo and Eminent Flesh due to Causes of Women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lentigo is very slightly adjusted according to natural causes, so that it is stretched and made visible; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and penetrates into the coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you must take the superfluity of lentigo with your own hand or with a needle and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not leave any residue in the insertion, especially in the region of the razor, so that it does not provoke a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, cure that one with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the great one until it fills that one, and very slightly emerges at the top parts as if from a hen (and for this reason we will also call this "disease of the tail"); therefore, you must insert it just like inserting lentigo, and cure that one until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Seventy-second Chapter.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the Cure of Eczema.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Eczema is when a woman's clitoris is not perforated or is only slightly pierced.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has preceded, and it is caused either by flesh not well adjusted or by subtle membrane or thick skin.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the abdomen of the great one, or in the sides of it, or in the uppermost part of it, or in the lowest part of it, and prohibits copulation, pregnancy, and childbirth, and very slightly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by observing the metrona, if the swelling is apparent, then pronounced; but if not apparent, then accordingly you should search for it with the ties or with the ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if swelling is caused by subtle membrane, and it appears on both lips, then accordingly you should cut and break that one.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you pause over the two lips with powder, and accordingly pause the threads indicated on both sides.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her arms extended, and accordingly extend both lips with force until that subtle membrane is broken and the swelling is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And accordingly, take wool and dip it in oil and pause that one on the location, and keep the patient at home for a day so that the inserted location is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the membrane is thick and dense, then accordingly it is necessary that you insert it with spatula or with myrtle leaves.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the swelling is due to inflammation, then accordingly suspend that one with a needle, and insert it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And be familiar with the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as ahaemia, blood of dragon, and enses, adjusted to the album of urine.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And accordingly, administer a leaden cannula of ample size so that the wound is not consolidated too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that one for several days and administer lukewarm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural birth of other flesh, and accordingly it is necessary that you insert according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to gangrenous apostemes, then do not make any opposition with iron in any way regarding the gangrenous aposteme which is in the mother.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Seventy-third Chapter.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids, Tumors and Red Boils that occur in the Clitoris of Women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are a kind of swelling of the orifices of many veins, until from those veins there flows blood continuously; and as hemorrhoids become old and their throats are formed.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of these species and their signs, and I will say here which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and throats when they are in the abdomen of the mother and do not appear to the sense, then accordingly in those there is no cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifice of the mother above which one feels sensation, those are the ones that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and accordingly extend the throat with forceps or with rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And accordingly powderize over those veins the flows of blood from one of the powders that are inserted without biting, just like acaena and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And accordingly, apply pressure with her feet for one hour, and accordingly pause that one in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the blood flow persists, then accordingly make that one to cease in a decoction of samphire and scorzonera roots and gallnuts and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And accordingly, take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a poultice with water on the back of her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is stopped, it's good; and otherwise, make adhere with two poultices, and on the nipples without scarring.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, take wool and submerge that one in the juice of colicandro or in the juice of arnoglossa or in the juice of guarravier mixed with vinegar, and make it adhere to the location; and accordingly cure the location with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But the throat that has a rough regard, it is necessary that you insert there what appears to you from that one according to what I have said in the equal measurement.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that one until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Seventy-fourth Chapter.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the Perforation of Accidental Emission in the Mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of accidental apostemes occur in the mother, such as gangrene and apostematic lithotomy and ulcers and hubbub and herpetomenes and fistulous hemorrhoids and ravenous and throat and other apostemes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and their species and signs, and the cures for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that you say in this treatise of gangrenous aposteme which occurs in the mother when it is one of those apostemes that are cured by means of surgery, and if you wish to know in what manner the operation is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the gangrenous aposteme in its initial stage is sharp with percussion and pulse and fever, and if it becomes inflamed and if one feels sensation on that location, then do not cut with perforation of iron, but cure that one with water that helps with maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And accordingly it is necessary that you make the woman lie on a pillow with two pillows; and recline on her back and adjust her feet to the lower part of the belly, and her arms be expanded, and pause her hands below her nails, and tie each one with a bandage to water as convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And accordingly the midwife should follow the right direction and administer the instrument with which the orifice of the mother is opened, in the form which will come forth from those causes that will be appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And accordingly when you want to administer this instrument, make it so that the ray is applied to the abdomen of the mother of the woman, and what enters into the mother from the instrument should not be more than the abdomen of the mother and guide the malady.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the abdomen of the mother, then accordingly it is necessary that you sprinkle powder on the texture of the abdomen of the mother so that it prevents the entrance of any instrument into the abdomen of the mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And accordingly, you should pause the pivot that runs in the instrument from above and below, and the one who ministers should hold the instrument and turn the pivot until the orifice of the mother is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then accordingly it is necessary that you cut off that part from the head of the instrument with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then accordingly it is necessary that you pause in the wound a poultice submerged in rose oil or green oil which has some stinging properties; and pause the pressure on the section in the abdomen of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And pause above the mother's back and on the pubic area a clean wool submerged in water in which mauve flowers have been added.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly it is cured in two days with ointment which corresponds to that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the mother is washed and the wound in this way that it is anointed with water and honey, and accordingly with water in which rue or Aristolochia longa has been added, and accordingly returns to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the mother's abdomen, then accordingly it is necessary that you be prohibited from the cure of that one with iron, having cured that one with water as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Seventy-fifth Chapter.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner they should be medicated when the bodies are sick according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman expelling her contents at the lower part and desiring to smell the air, and above that she is relaxed because what is coming out from her is the part, and hasten the delivery of the fetus, then you know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the delivery of the child on its head, and the umbilical cord suspended or pending from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the belly of the child be compressed so that the fetus descends slightly, and when they come out on its head, they are delivered to it, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another part is non-natural and not to be trusted, for when the fetus is delivered with its feet first and the child's body is delivered in front of its head and its feet, one hand or at the foot... or is delivered with the head of the child and one hand or at the belly of the child, and very rarely it is turned on its back, and resembling the figures of non-natural childbirth.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing you all the figures of those, and what power is in them, so that they may be significant by this and stand on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the child is born on its head by natural extraction, and it is vehement over the woman and made to part with difficulty, and sometimes the virtue of the woman is already debilitated, then accordingly make that one cease, or what women have, and evaporate the menses with fenugreek and humectant oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And accordingly insert the midwife between her said small spatula and a slit in that one, or cut that one with its own nail until it flows forth what is in her of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it doesn't descend, then accordingly the woman should be anointed with mummy of papyrus and mummy of fenugreek mixed with camomile.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And accordingly command her to be anointed with it, and accordingly the anointing should be compressed and make that one sneeze with conditions; and take away her mouth and nose from her for an hour, because the fetus will soon forget about it.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if two of the fetus's hands are forgotten at the beginning, then accordingly you should reduce those with small ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then accordingly pause the woman on a pillow and lift her feet up, and accordingly conceive the pillow on the earth; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not returned and the fetus dies, then accordingly insert those and extract the remnant of the fetus or tie its body to her hand with cloth and extract that one with equality, because it will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the Delivery of the Fetus on Its Feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is born on its feet, then accordingly you should push those inwards, and accordingly turn the fetus little by little, and accordingly bring one foot of it and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are born into the arms, then accordingly you should command her to expel, and make that one sneeze with conditions, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten according to what we have recounted, then accordingly you should return the fetus little by little until it pauses in its natural figure, because it will soon be forgotten with a lighter delivery.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited according to all that we have recounted, then accordingly take mummy of alta and dissolved gum, and strike the whole in the mortar with good striking, and accordingly line up with water the woman's menses, at the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And accordingly make that one cease in hot water, until it achieves the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts below are relaxed, then accordingly make her take a sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause that one for her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when she has taken the sub-fumigation for an hour, then accordingly make her lie on a pillow, and accordingly make that one sneeze and stretch out her mouth, and take away from that, and press the lower part of her belly with light compression, because the fetus will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Delivery of the Fetus on Its Elbows and Hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is delivered in this way, then accordingly you should gently insert its hands little by little; and accordingly the woman should be lying on her back, with her feet hanging down, and those hands resting on the light, and complete its hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And accordingly press on the woman's belly little by little, and accordingly extract that which is left over from her feet to the armpits, until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forgotten, then accordingly take her feet and move them violently, and accordingly press that which is above the hypochondria little by little until the fetus reaches the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And accordingly insert its hands and bring the fetus little by little, and command the woman to expel until the fetus is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Delivery of the Fetus Lying Transverse with One of Its Hands Hanging Down.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be gentle in reducing the woman's hand, but if you cannot reduce that one, then accordingly lift the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then accordingly make her lie on the bed, and conceive the woman's arms with a violent concussion, and accordingly administer those remedies which you and we have recounted from mummy.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth is over, then accordingly make her lie on a pillow, and accordingly study the reduction of the hand, and bring forth the fetus according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Delivery of the Fetus with its hands spread out and the woman's flesh on both sides of her mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and accordingly turn it little by little, and make it easy for that one.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized, and accordingly pause on the menses of that one with what we have recounted from oils and mummy.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And accordingly command her to cough little by little, and when you have finished that, then accordingly make her lie on a pillow and command her to incline herself over the right side, and accordingly command her to be compressed; and make that one sneeze with conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the Prepared Fetus Above the Side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the child is born in a terrifying manner according to this method, consider, and accordingly you should insert the second finger with your nail into that one until it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of her, then accordingly you should insert that one from the umbilicus, so that it may not be retained and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And accordingly push the fetus into the lower parts until it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and if God so wills, it will be forgotten with a lighter delivery.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of Twins or Many Fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born in sets of two or three, and sometimes even four, but this is rare and should not happen; but there are causes that are against nature, and do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And in those cases, whether they are multiple or not, one second fetus, and they are separated by ciphac, distinguish those into the ligament at the umbilicus of each of them. And sometimes they are forgotten like this, as if it were one fetus for a lighter delivery, and sometimes they are delivered non-naturally like we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to deliver and proceed according to what we have said about the non-natural figures, then accordingly you should care for those like we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does that which facilitates ease and subtlety, and with delay, and is gentle according to all figure, as it is prepared from the beginning leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted fetuses.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed in the womb to have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten children, and you should verify that a woman aborts nine times and another has all ten, which is caused by the measurement of the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is necessary in the science of the midwife, for it is a great deal that appears like this to her, and therefore pause should be made at this point with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not born outside, and you are forced to use an operation on her, then accordingly it is necessary that you consider whether the woman has a healthy virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents by which on her there is feared loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then accordingly it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back on a bed or pillow, and her head be inclined downward and her arms elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold that one by two parts or tie her in a bed for so that the body of hers does not extend too far during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And accordingly you should moisten the mouth of her womb with olive oil and mummy of alta and fenugreek and seed of lily.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And accordingly the midwife should take her hand with those oils and mummy, and accordingly insert her hand with ease into the womb, and accordingly search for the location where the fingers will be placed on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And when you have found the convenient location: then accordingly you should consider if the fetus is prepared to come out on its head, and accordingly place your fingers in the hollow of the skull, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the furcula of the skull, or in the places proper for the ribs, or below the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the delivery is over the feet of hers, then accordingly in the pelvis or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And accordingly you should hold the fingers with your right hand, and pause the curvature of hers in that location which is between the said fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand with ease and place the fingers in one of those locations which we have said, until you reach the cause of birth.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And accordingly you should pause and remain in the position of hers another finger, or the third if it is necessary, in order that there may be a gentle attraction, and not an extension according to her natural straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it is good for all parts, in order that the delivery of hers may be facilitated as if it were done by hand.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is good in her that which is between them, so that the extension may be softened; and if some part of hers is retained, then accordingly the midwife should apply some of her said fingers with oil and insert those expertly and turn around with what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then accordingly the fingers should be permitted to enter that location which is higher up; and make it so until all the fetus is brought forth.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is stuck in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce that one by the constriction of hers, then accordingly it is necessary that cloth be wrapped around that one; and accordingly extract that one until all is brought forth, and insert it either at the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so it is necessary to do the same in the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or if there is constriction during the delivery, or if there is water adjusted in the head of hers, then accordingly it is necessary to insert between the said spiny spatula and make an incision on the head and extract the water, or what discloses that one with a tool which is called "alundat", whose form will come with the forms of other instruments in the capital chapter which is apropos to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do the same if the fetus is naturally large-headed: and accordingly it is necessary to incise that one with an allegator, or take that one with an alundat as we have said; and accordingly extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is extracted and is constricted at the furcula, then accordingly it should be incised in order that the humidity which is in the feet may be poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated nor obedient to delivery, then accordingly you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what will be possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the afterbirth is apostematic or is in water retention, then accordingly it is necessary that you perforate that one until the humidity which is in hers flows out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is on her feet, then accordingly the attraction of hers is light and the direction to her mouth is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted by the belly and feet, then accordingly it is necessary that you extract that one with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and that you incise the belly and feet until the water which is in those flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are stuck and return to the head, then accordingly insert your left hand; but if the mouth of hers is swollen, then accordingly insert your hand into the prepuce of her, and search for that one's head, and attract it with those fingers until it enters into the mouth of hers, and accordingly insert one or two fingers and draw hers towards those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of hers is constricted by apostematic swelling which occurs in her, then accordingly it is not necessary to trouble about that; but before administering effusion of humid and greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on her ribcage, then accordingly it should be, if possible, sewn; and administered water as we have said in the live fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then accordingly it should be incised in pieces, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And accordingly one should not leave any cause behind the second finger.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then accordingly administer the water as we have said for curing of apostematic swellings which occur in her.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there occurs a flow of blood, then accordingly send it down in stiptic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman whose womb was dead, and accordingly on that same spot another pregnancy was undertaken, and accordingly the fetus is another.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to her that after a long time an apostema occurred in her umbilicus; and it swelled up into a boil, and began to burst forth.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called to her cure, and treated her for a long time, and the wound did not consolidate.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you applied some causes of strong attraction to her, and extracted one bone from her, and accordingly passed some days, and extracted another bone; and you were too amazed, since in the womb there was no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore you covered the wound, and extracted many bones from her, the woman existing in her own millenary dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, and corrected herself with a small piece of flesh.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you did not hesitate to say that it was strange, but rather because in this is science and aid to what the physician has with his hand for curing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments which are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The shape of the vice in which the mother is opened.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a strengthener in which the free ends are joined together by two vice-like contraptions at both extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	And however this vice should be more subtle than the strictor, and made of ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the diameter of each stick is two fingers and a little more, and the margin of each is one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle location of two sticks are two adjustments of those sticks which are already fixed, the length of which is half a palm and a little more, and the diameter of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that they can be opened with those when you turn the two prescribed vice-like contraptions.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it there are two additional pieces like those, and the length of those additional pieces is one palm, and the diameter of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then accordingly you should cause the woman to lean back on her bed, with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And accordingly place your hand with the instrument as you would with forceps, in equal measure according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother, until she does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vice which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impeller, with which the fetus is impelled.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of Amisidate, with which the great head is contained.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the end, just like times, and some times are made long just like forceps according to this form, just like times, with teeth just like the teeth of a saw blade into which it is inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of Amisidate little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of finger having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of finger having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which teeth are attached like those of a saw, with which the head of the fetus is contained.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of that and prepared by the artisans, as much as it is lighter for their operation and more numerous are the people for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you must not omit to prepare those instruments, whatever they may be, because the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second finger.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second finger is retained, you must command the child to retain its right hand, and accordingly make her sneeze with conditions, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of hers and on her nostrils, and if by so it has emerged outside, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then accordingly take a ball and pierce a hole in the cover, pause in that herb and fill the mouth of the mother with it, just like with celandine and rue and anise and chamomile and Arabic senna and cassia lignea and safflower.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the ball, and pause it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And accordingly place a cane from flax in the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the vapor comes out into the concavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And accordingly make her sneeze just as we have said, and the second finger will be expelled with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure does not work and the second finger remains, then accordingly command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of altarion, and accordingly insert that into the conic cavity and search for the second finger, and when you have found it, then take it and stretch it little by little. But if it is annexed to the womb of the mother, then accordingly insert your hand according to what we have recounted, and when you have found the second finger, extract it little by little according to the rule, so that the mother does not suffer from excessive attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	And accordingly it should be facilitated on both right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And accordingly it should be adjusted in the quantity of attraction, since it will obey and escape from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, as we have already recounted the cure with sneezing and medication from the ball with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recounted, then accordingly take heed that you do not force it upon her in iteration of abstraction, but rather it should be brought to the mouth of the mother and placed at the cleft of the woman, and accordingly make it crusty with egg white and tetra-pharmacum; for that will cause it to rot away after a few days and be dissolved.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots away, it rises to the head, and to the stomach, and leads the patient astray; and accordingly it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences are administered accordingly.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already experimented with sub-fumigation of Nazitort and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menses and the second finger:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of beryl or horn.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And it should be paused with the subtle extremity in the cavity and the broad extremity above the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be paused on the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that in until the sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure for the unbroken navel of the child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born with navels that are not perforated, those which have already become subtle and opaque.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then accordingly instruct the midwife to pierce that navel with her finger; and if not, then pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And accordingly pause on that navel, pouring in wine and oil; and accordingly cure it with egg white until it is clean.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may become opaque, then accordingly pause a tube in the navel for several days, and stop when the child wants to pass stool.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if the navel becomes opaque due to consolidation of wound or aposteme; then accordingly it should be incised, and accordingly cured with the water which we have said for the cure and the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the cure for fistulas that remain behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that remain in the departure, which are lower than the navel and thicker, those which remain near the anus outside or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a single fistula or multiple ones.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodule is ancient and flows with white watery fluid or subtle pus, and some times it has some of these fistulas penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating ones are known by what comes out of them through excretion and windiness; and sometimes the patient uses the method of excretion, and very little is expelled from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas penetrate into the space, entering the bladder and the urethra; and some of those penetrating ones enter the junction of the cleft and the notch of the clitoris.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the way to know if a penetrating fistula is not penetrating is that you insert your finger into the anus and gently probe with a subtle instrument of horn or iron in the fistula when there is no resistance.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is resistance in that, then accordingly insert into it a subtle instrument of lead or horsehair until you feel the instrument or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you don't feel it at all nor proceed from the tube any cause of emission or worm or windiness, just as we have said, then accordingly know that it is not penetrating, and accordingly give up the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or urethra, then accordingly its significance is evident from the urine of that and prohibition of it to be so, in order that the place may be consolidated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the junction of the cleft or into the bone and causing pain in the circuit, then accordingly its sign is that the instrument will pass through here if there is no resistance in the bone, and causing pain in the circuit of the departure; and that from there you will have pus always; and that it will not be cured by medicine, nor consolidated with egg white.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is labor and toil of skilled physicians on which we have fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, expectation of healing with iron is hoped for according to what we have recounted, and what has already been proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And so the patient lies between your two hands and raises their knees to theirs, the clefts being inclined towards the belly of the patient, and accordingly insert a lead or horn instrument into the fistula if there is resistance, until you know the place where the instrument can pass.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the navel, then accordingly you should insert your finger into the navel.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the instrument already having passed through and beginning to penetrate, or if you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then accordingly you know for certain that it is penetrating; and then do not labor on that, since there is no healing in that, just as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some say that it can be cured in certain men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which it is hoped for recovery in that is that you burn a subtle cauter, according to the size of the fistula, just as we have said before, and insert that ignited into the fistula until it spreads around the navel; and accordingly repeat that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted flesh-tubes are fixed, which resemble the feathers of an owl.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And accordingly cure that with calomel wraps wrapped in parchment, until all those adjusted flesh-tubes are cleansed; and accordingly cure that with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good is; and otherwise, it will not be healed at any time by other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the instrument enters and does not penetrate into the navel which is in the anus, and between that and the instrument which is a velamen of flesh or ciphac, and sometimes the fistula opens in what appears to be the surface of the skin, then accordingly dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the instrument, and it will be in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the instrument is, and through the instrument is liberated and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And accordingly cleanse those flesh-tubes which are assembled like the feathers of an owl, and do not remain any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flux of blood comes out sometimes when you are cleaning those flesh-tubes, then accordingly take the milk that is and of the pus, it is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: first, adjustment of those adjusted flesh-tubes, and secondly, abscission of the blood from excessive humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And accordingly cure that with calomel wraps wrapped in parchment or in threefold cloth until the wound gets better, and accordingly cure the wound with egg white, hard flesh generating and consolidating.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines in which there is astringency and excess; when accordingly it is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear iteration.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the cavity of the anus and is prolonged from the surface of the body, then accordingly insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if you find the instrument and between you and it is a velamen of ciphac or flesh, and it is intended for penetration, then accordingly there will be no operation in that place, but only according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Which cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize that as we have said; or to dry it until you achieve the conquest of it so that it becomes possible for you to insert the instruments and the cure intended; and not proceed with drying at all because you do not want to excise the liver containing the navel, and the patient's wish is to come true; and accordingly cure that with what we have said, since it will be healed very quickly; or to lengthen that velamen and clean up that pus that dries out that area into the proper anus, as we have said, either with a probe or another sharp instrument of sharp extremity, and accordingly cleanse those flesh-tubes which are in the section until you can see through it; and accordingly strive to make the restoration of all the wound with drying, and if the upper opening is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the departure of the anus, and becomes easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is ended according to this manner: when you insert the instrument into the fistula, and it is in the lateral part of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and on the margin of the anus, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle prepared for sewing according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that faithful wrap of five folds or around those, and accordingly insert the instrument with faith into the fistula until you achieve the conquest of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrating in the margin of the anus, then accordingly you extract the thread from that tube and insert your finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the thread and adjust the two ends together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or two, and when more the thread is inserted into the flesh, strengthen it until those flesh-tubes are extracted which are between the two ends of the thread and fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And accordingly cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then accordingly make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, but not in the cavity, for it is not up to you to do that lest you excise the liver; and accordingly do that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spatula spine with which the fistula is opened: its curvature is very sharp and the other part is non-sharp, so that you do not excise anything that is not necessary, just as sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two manners, for either they are between the anus resembling charcoal, or else those are like a bunch of raisins.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them constantly and is one, or many, and outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the measures of little moisture, from which citrine water or a small amount of blood with continuous flesh flows, and according to the color of the flesh.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is outside the anus is to command the patient to settle down and to express themselves into the anus until it opens and the hemorrhoids appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take hold of it and suspend with the hooks or whatever instruments you have at your disposal, and accordingly cut away those hemorrhoids along their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the hooks are not taken in those because of their moisture and softening, then accordingly take those with a rough cloth or with a piece of cloth or with a woolen rag, and extract them with your fingers, and accordingly cut away those hemorrhoids and powder some powders over them around the incision, so that they become attached to those at the place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is precedented in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And accordingly cure those with another cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then accordingly anoint the patient with anointing oil in which there is a small biting, and wash it with that water that is in the anus and make it obey evacuation slightly when the patient has evacuated.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then accordingly the cause of their being is easy, and it is that you take those with your finger or with hooks, and cut away those, and accordingly cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever will make incision, must administer suturing of them according to this manner: take a thread wrapped and insert that into the needle and accordingly extract the hemorrhoids at the upper parts, and make it penetrate through the root of the other part, and envelop the two ends of the thread in the most distant part of the needle, and so laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong suturing, and accordingly tie off the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one and not cut it off, in order that the superfluity of blood may flow from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And accordingly place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote on the anus, and place that over it and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly leave it until it is closed; and when it is closed, cure those with egg whites or another cure until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	The treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times accidents occur due to excessive tearing or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are so ancient and do not respond to that medicine, then accordingly you must cut away those parts with the point of a spatula or your finger until they become moist and the excess flesh above is absorbed by those, which prevents consolidation; and accordingly cure those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then accordingly you must cut away those parts with a reason more violent than the first one, until they bleed and are excoriated; and accordingly cure those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of Almesamar, that is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that Almesamar is the key, and it is not so if not according to the color of the flesh like a cap of chivalry, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and those said above, and thus one must use force by means of those pains to drive away love.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to incise that which is in the cavity of the key, and to keep it with forceps or hooks, and to eradicate its root; and accordingly cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But truly, warts are small, hard, round nodules on the surface of the skin, and many times they appear on children's faces.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for it is to stretch and incise that, or to strengthen that with a thread or skin until it closes.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already they are eradicated on both sides and on both sides with the instrument which I will show you.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a mole is a small, fatty or fistulous prominence on the surface of the skin that becomes inflamed when it is attacked by the fire and appears to be mummified around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a needle of goose quill or of vulture's feather, and make it strong, and place that on the mole so that it contains the circle of the needle in the parts of the skin; and accordingly revolve your hand with the needle until you incise what is in the circuit of the mole, and place it in the flesh of the skin, and eradicate the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Be the upper part of the needle very thin, soft (it is not perforated), wrapped so that on the said surface it learns to be ablated and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the mole according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterizing in the book of medicine.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The form of the instruments that are administered to give anointing.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes it is made anointing of silver or lead or melted iron or hammered iron; and sometimes it is made with small instruments big or small according to those which are administered, for that which is administered to the little children is small; and of those whose bottoms are rough or wrinkled, the anointings of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of great and little anointing.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle above, in which the pouch is attached, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the pouch is attached, just as it is sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be soft (not open) like a lion's, going back to subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and thicker by a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch in which medicines from the bladder of an animal or wool of a sheep are placed, and the root of it is one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by many small holes like it is turned around; and if the space which is between the holes is as thick as said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And accordingly insert it into those holes a strong thread of raw thread which is of ten threads or surrounds them; and adjust the pouch to that, and when the pouch is placed in it, be tight at the head of the anointing between two distinct ones with strong constriction, and accordingly anoint each hole: But the quality of anointing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And accordingly, the patient should be placed on their back with their legs elevated and a cloth spread under them, and pause below it one cushion or a bolster; and accordingly anoint the extremity of the cauterizer with oil or albumen of hen or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and accordingly insert that into the anus with ease, and accordingly the attendant takes the pouch and evacuates that with two hands and samples with violence until everything in the anointing is evacuated into the bedpan; and accordingly extract the anointing and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to happen, keep it as long as possible; and if they sleep with that for all one night, it is more likely to be a remedy.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you anoint that in the diseases of flux of the stomach and the evacuation of it is obstructed, then accordingly you will iterate the cauterizer until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or apostemes in the anus, then accordingly use a cauterizer that is very subtle and lion-like, from those cauterizers with which children are anointed.
De curacio de las plaguas.	The treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that which is fitting for a free person, and I say thus the treatment of those with me and with medicines according to their complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that wounds are diversified according to this, inasmuch as they are made the wounds and according to the place on which they are placed.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many times wounds are made are as follows: like a blow of a hammer, or incision with a sword or dagger, or percussion with a lance, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many other causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the wounds that are on the parts of the body are as follows: like a wound that is on the head, or neck, or arms, or belly, or thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some wounds by which one pauses that rationalization and rule over other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the wounds of the head, simple ones, for the recollection of the complex ones will come at the beginning of the fourth chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and is not a fracture, then consider: if it is caused by a blow of a hammer or something similar, and already the bone has been so broken that there is great swelling and you fear that an apostema may form, then you take hold of the patient's head and fleubotomize it as soon as possible, without delay; and extract from that wound as much blood as is necessary according to the quantity of the virtue of the medicine, unless there is some other cause prohibiting fleubotomy, especially if the blood that has issued from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And be the fleubotomy on the opposite side of the wounded part; and beware the patient of replenishment, and of wine and of heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits from the beginning, then accordingly minimize the food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause over the wound if an apostema has formed cautiously, and cut in with rosy oil or wine that is stipticated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain of an apostema cautiously, then accordingly pause over the wound, if it is recent and its air has not changed that powder which I recommend in small quantity.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then accordingly pause over another application until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is great or caused by incision with a sword and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pulps, then accordingly adjust those with suture according to what I recommend about the suture of wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already discovered to be of bone and flesh, and there is no retention of it except a small suspensori, then accordingly incise that and accordingly cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to abstain from foods which are gross: heads and forms, similar to theirs, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the bone putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then accordingly incise all that is rotten and take out what remains, and accordingly cure what remains.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flux can occur, and it is not abscessed by medicines, then accordingly inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not incised, then accordingly incise it with a spatula or tie it off; and if necessary, provoke what we have said to not concur, then accordingly cauterize until the blood is absorbed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then accordingly the cause of them is light; in such a way that you powderize on those this powder, for it consolidates before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of non-extinguished cause; all well mixed and crushed, and fill the wound with it, and construe it with good constriction until it adheres well to that, and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly strengthen that above with poultices and compress it, and do not remove it until it is thus as if it were not apostemed, for the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes do this alone, when you don't have in front of you olive oil and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And already perform this same operation on great wounds when it is necessary to pause over them and be tight, and on recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the time of summer, then accordingly do not think about the position of this powder, but instead cure those with what we have said, in such a way that you pause over them with certain ointments or with powders made from flour and water mixed with honey until they take on a purulent appearance; and accordingly cure those with another cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a fracture in the bone of the wound, and it is small, then accordingly extract what remains with gentle gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will say the cure for fractures of the head in this which is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then accordingly there is no difference in medicine and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery is injured, then accordingly if it is a nerve, do not intervene with surgery but rather avoid any cure that would cause violent stiptication, such as zinnier and zegi which is vinegar and similar to theirs, because they are injurious to nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause over the wound any cause of total numbness, for the substance of nerves is numb and their continuation is in the brain, which is the most noble part of all limbs.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if you use what is cured with light medicines, such as it being washed with lukewarm water, some times injected into rose-colored or non-rose-colored oil, and then when it is washed with lukewarm water and the other parts are minored according to this manner, and ointments moistened.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is great, then accordingly administer suture, or bind the lips of it, and accordingly cure that with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lowest part of purulent matter, then accordingly pierce that in the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the wound an artery has been incised and a flux of blood has resulted, then accordingly separate or dry that, or tie off that, or cauterize that if necessary provokes at that.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the spine or all have been incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then accordingly adjust the lips of the bone with suture over the canal of the spine and do not touch that; before equaling that and reducing it to its natural figure, and accordingly strengthen that with decent stricture, and leave it for a few days; and accordingly cure that with ointments in which there is stiptication and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound is in the bone and has made an impression, then accordingly puncture that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; and what is not clothed, leave that until the wound is purulent, and separate and be relieved from the excrescence.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then accordingly powderize on it the powder which I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if in the wound there is a fistula, then accordingly cure that with what will be remembered in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds of the neck or similar when it is made between the vertebrae and is caused by a sword, dagger, lance, or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or dagger wound and the depth of the wound is considerable, then accordingly consider whether the patient has ventilation when they are lying down; accordingly know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if the wound is not deep and the wound is recent with its own blood, then accordingly pause in it on the first hour with powder, and do not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart and harms the patient; but rather pause in it with an attractive ointment, and remove it two times a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then accordingly pause in the orifice of the wound with a piece of cloth so that it sucks out what you have from the humors; and make the patient sleep over the wound so that the fluid that is there will be adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound and the patient does not experience spasms, tremors of the heart, nor constriction of the armpits, and has other good dispositions towards it, then accordingly know that the wound is healed; and then cure that with poultices and another cure until it is fully healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is impeded and it has been open for a long time, then accordingly know that it has become a fistula; cure then that according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by incision of a sword or dagger and is simple in the surface of the foot or head, then accordingly cure that with what precedes suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the wound has made an impression in the bone and there are pieces of bone that need to be extracted, then accordingly twist the wound and cut to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then accordingly leave them inside until the wound purifies, and the extraction of them is relieved.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for the other wounds that occur in the other members, the treatment in healing is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of Wounds of the Belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great some times it is necessary to open or cut the budel or nerve of the budel, in order that there be an introduction of their own substance and a suture of theirs to be more violent and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it seems that the reduction of theirs is more difficult if you do not take care to introduce their substance into its place at once, for it opens up and becomes swollen, making it difficult for the instrument to be used.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in that there is not difficulty in reducing the budel, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that suturing the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common which are necessary for suturing other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures proper to it communicate with the other wounds, but are more proper in the suturing of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you whatever exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the belly from it, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then accordingly this is in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the belly has come inflated due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this is so, accordingly it is necessary that you scrape that in such a way that you submerge a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or that you gather in warm water, and cyperum, and spic, and then apply that to the belly until the inflation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this with vinegar in which there is a purging quality, and it is better than hot water alone for the resolution of the inflation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflation be resolved, accordingly you moisten the belly with water in which is cooked alum and meadow-sweet, because through this the instrument of it is facilitated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of it is excused in this cure, then accordingly you cut the disruption a little with an instrument by which they are incised and mortified.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is proper and not severe, and there is no occupation to cut too much, nor to occupy oneself in cutting unnecessarily.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the Instrument: see how its shape is like this:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one end of it bent and acute, and the other end not acute, and the extremity subtle, and not like the subtlety of a spatula, but rather blunt by a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the wound is amplified and yields forth from the belly, accordingly it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural shape, in its own proper place, if possible above all, for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, accordingly it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his knees higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then accordingly you place the head and legs higher than the remaining parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then accordingly place your intention and consideration always so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is necessary to administer this in great wounds and middling wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause for that which is at your preparation, and accordingly make the minister be between your most skilled ones, who has the disruption entirely under his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and accordingly uncovers from this to that which sees some other cause for suturing.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common manner of suturing: take the needle, or count the needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and accordingly leave it at the extremity of the disruption from the said ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or twice, that you do not put faith in both ends of the bone, with both ends of the ciphac that is left the bone of the parties inwardly, until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two ends of the bone and two ends of the ciphac, and so there are four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And accordingly strengthen it with a double thread in the circle of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and accordingly add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and accordingly leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in it, and accordingly tie that with a thread like as it was tied to the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be middling between thickness and subtlety, for the thin needles barely cut into the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to manipulate in the bone, and therefore it is necessary that they be middling in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be placed in both ends of the bone proper to one, lest the flesh be barely cut and the wound be inflamed before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And there should not be prolonged suturing so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And accordingly insert the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during his sleep; and place poultices spread out on all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of suturing with needles in this manner are more convenient for small wounds, for they suffice in the suture of them with one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer with suturing all four ends, of the bone and two ends of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which thread is wrapped evenly in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And accordingly when you have the needle penetrated these four ends, withdraw the needle from that middle part of which it began, so that the thread retrays its place from the most superior part to the wound, so that the suturing be according to the suture of cloth with which the cloths are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the finger smaller.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suturing is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such suturing I cured the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been wounded by a dagger, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the middle of the belly, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the belly had been open for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured him and he was healed; and accordingly he lived for many years, and is converted to his former dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle it was so, for you did not treat him with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but you paused over the wound cutting twice a day and ablution with water of honey until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But you said two species of proper suture according to the narrative of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it's that you began with the bone suture, and inserted the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And therefore when the needle penetrates into the bone and meets the lacertus according to rightness and in length throughout the whole body, and leaves the end of the ciphac where you inserted the needle; and makes it penetrate into the other extremity the needle from the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the thigh.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then when you have made it penetrate once, accordingly make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the thigh from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the end of the ciphac that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity of the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that penetration of yours, by which you cause it to penetrate into the ciphac in the extremity of the mirror, which is on the part of it, until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And accordingly begin from this side, and cut that with the end of the ciphac on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the bone which penetrated, and accordingly reduce it into that bone and close the end of the ciphac which is on the other side with this end of the mirror; and withdraw that one from the bone which is of part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make this once and another, and make this once again accordingly with the other once until you have closed all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you close with suture of pellicies in which you close the skin, so that you close the ciphac one time from the part of the extremity of the bone, and then leave it once until you have completed all.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second species of proper suture which you said Gualia, and this is according to the word of him and by him recounted, is that you close it according to semilitut in which certain medicines are closed, so that they add all part to its corresponding part to what is convenient for nature; and apply the end of one side of it and the end of the mirror to the other end of it, and this is done according to how I have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you put the needle into the end of the mirror at your own discretion from the outside part, and make it penetrate to the inside part in that same spot, and leave two ends of the ciphac; and accordingly revolve the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the ciphac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And accordingly revolve those threads, and make them penetrate from the inside part to the outside part in two ends of the mirror on the other side that is opposite.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture of which I spoke earlier.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the word of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And others say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert into these a thread, and begin with the introduction of needle from this side which belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who close the skins together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when disruption is in the middle part of the belly, accordingly the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of medicine for wound is judgment of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you succeed in curing a recent wound at the same time as its own blood before it has altered that, and reduces the swelling and closes it and adjusts it decently, accordingly pause over that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, accordingly pause over those ointments which are at your presence until they make firm pressure and let go the threads, and be consolidated ciphac and mirror; and accordingly cure it thus as is the cure of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at hand, accordingly pause over that for a while, since it begins to putrefy, cut and change it twice a day, just as I taught you, until it is healed, because you do not need another medicine in many dispositions when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may communicate to damage the principal members, accordingly it is necessary that you submerge linen cloth in quality tallow oil or in rose oil, and pause that in the circle of places which are between the angles and leave those as they are.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own belly, since many times this is necessary, accordingly anoint that with black bean juice, and especially if the inflammation has been produced in the belly and is made an exit through the convolutions of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that what is from the thick belly is easier to heal than what is in the thin bellies.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the belly which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wound that is made in it entirely; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its magnitude, and because of the subtlety of the body of that part, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is a thread, and you succeed in getting it recent, reduce it according to your rightness with which you reduce bellies together.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the space and is already become green or black, accordingly you strengthen that with thread over the place which is degraded from it, in order that the fluxes of blood may return, because in the thread are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And accordingly insert into this that is another bond, and pause the two ends of the thread pending from the left part of the wound, in order that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it from the compression of the thread and emission of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the belly.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the belly and it is small, accordingly it is possible that it can be restored in certain men, because of this reason you saw him who was wounded in his own belly with the blow of a lance and had an old wound made fistula, and it was swollen and distended.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And then I began to heal him already as he was not convinced in the healing of it, but rather I continued to subtlety that until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I then saw the place already consolidated, and I recommended to the patient who had developed an illness as a result of the accident in his own belly; and he did not develop any further after this bad accident and remained in his usual good habits eating and drinking, and accordingly entered into bathing and is exercised in his daily activities.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already others have said that when an illness occurs in the belly and it is small, accordingly it is necessary to tie it according to this manner: and it is that you take threads of great caps; and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound and pause a thread from those which has the mouth open over the two lips of the wound; therefore when you take on those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And accordingly pause another thread near the first one, and do not cease to make threads one after another according to the quantity of all the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And accordingly reduce that and close the wound; and the attached capsules remain in the belly until the belly is healed; and no harm occurs to anyone's illness.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the belly be tied with a fine thread made from the belly of an animal attached to it, since it is more in needle; and it is that you take the end of these threads from the belly, and it is very thin, and accordingly tie the end of it to the thread, wrapped, and accordingly insert that thread into needles and close with that thread on the belly, and reduce that in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suture with threads is nothing but according to the way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin bellies, because accordingly it is not a simple matter but subtlety, and it is not healing of it entirely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and apostema when it becomes ulcerous and old, and is made an ulcer, and does not consolidate and always gets putrid, accordingly, in whatever member it may be, universally is called fistula and we call it that azuchem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a nodous formation, hard, white and painless, with which there is a convulsion similar to the pain of an owl; and for this reason we call that certain rizzats, i.e. pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some men humid, which gets putrid; and the humidity is very quickly absorbed in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is great, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already said in the division, accordingly as I told you about the wounds, that any ulcer that is not healed nor is on bare flesh, it is not so unless for one of these nine causes: of which one is because of lack of blood in the body; or due to malice of nature; or because between the wound and the lips there is hard flesh prohibiting the growth of new flesh; or because the ulcer itself is too large; or because the matter that is transmitted to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient for the cure of it; or when corruption takes hold in the region, and it is pestilence; or due to the property of the region such as occurs in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs, and healing of apostema is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Already I have shown all those causes and their signs, as well as the cure of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary that you know how to make the cure of fistula, which is made by way of operation with my hands.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because some are fistulas that penetrate to great veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to ciphac, or to belly, or to bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the composite joints composed in such a way as from hand and foot; and those which are near to the proximity of the main member and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that one of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the difficult-to-heal illnesses, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if some of the fistulas are of such depth that they do not penetrate to those places which I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in the cure of it, and wish to reach understanding of it, accordingly take a tenta of iron or steel, and if the fistula follows rightness, and you probe it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, accordingly investigate it with a thin leaden tenta, because lead with the lightness of its own body is alleviated and curved by the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has many horrible things, it is not possible for you to signify on it with a tenta.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	And accordingly close the opening through its openings, because the moisture which you use to cleanse it will flow into the other openings and run off from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And accordingly inquire exhaustively, according to which manner it is possible for you to know whether here there are bones or nerves, and if the fistula is long or short, or if it is a fistula with many openings and located above all on the sum of your strength, in your investigation, in which you investigate the patient, and the invention of pain due to your compression with your hand on the location, and similar signs and causes that occur at the apostema.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all those causes with a steady gaze, accordingly go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salient location, distant from the joint, or of nerves, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I tell you and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly you seal the fistula according to what is said before in the narration of it, and stop this that is in that filtration and corrupt flesh, and this that has been born from the orifice of the flesh, or of the tail and similar things, and cure this until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of long and deep depth, and it follows rightness, accordingly you must insert that into the preon as far as possible for you to signify; and accordingly clarify this from all its corrupt flesh; and accordingly administer certain wrapped medications, and introduce those into the convulsion of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with that for several times until the acute medicine has consumed all that remains in the convulsion of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly restore that with those which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, accordingly you must cauterize that according to what we have recounted.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to certify this, accordingly you must inquire into that and seal that according to what we have recounted, unless you prohibit some cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered by you and there is some corruption and blackness in it, accordingly you must scrape out that entire corruption; and accordingly cure that with what encloses it until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and gets putrid as before, accordingly know that you have not succeeded in the complete eradication of corruption; and then you must uncover it again and make the reason of it and clarify it with the last remaining force of yours, and accordingly restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And thus if it is healed, good it is; and otherwise, accordingly know that that corruption is in the deep, distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and then you must leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to draw that in, accordingly you must draw it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, accordingly make the extraction of all those in an exquisite manner, and leave not a single cause behind with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the humors makes you contrary, and in their insertion there is no fear nor error, accordingly insert those ligaments or flesh if it is here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if your preparation is not ready to extract the bones of your time, accordingly pause over the wound that perturbs the wound itself, and leave it until such time as this wound is in the environs of those bones, flesh, and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have inserted into your operation be constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	They had, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in a mixture of oil and wine, or a wound submerged in Egyptian balm, or in some of the green ointments, for when those ligaments rot, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and the attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone like the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar to those, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, accordingly scrape out that with a rasp only on the back side until that blackness and corruption is removed, and accordingly restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted from it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, accordingly it is necessary to close that and insert it entirely into the place where the corruption has spread, and accordingly cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you this, that you persuade a man in his own way for you to pause and consider carefully about your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There is a young man of about thirty years old, who suffers from pain in his hip, and the parts that are damaged on the outside are over the matter on the outside of the body until the matter has spread to the hip, and it is a material of apostema with great apostema, and there is no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was extended with that patient due to the error of the doctors until the apostema was hubert, and there was a great accumulation of matter, and his cure was accordingly paused until the hip was fistulated, and there were many openings in it which all drained pus and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then a multitude of doctors was applied to him for about two years, and there was no knowledge in them except in the art, until you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the hip of that man and the matters flowing from it through many openings in his great body; and already the body of that man was entirely stabled and the color of him was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced a probe into one of those openings and brought it to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And accordingly I explored all the openings and found those that reached their entirety on all parts of the hip.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and scraped over one of those openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found that it was corrupted, and already it was rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the hip was corrupted to such an extent that it had penetrated into the joint.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I covered with a layer of bone what was discovered and prepared from the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I found that it was not in the bone itself but rather that corruption which had abscessed and covered, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And accordingly, I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And accordingly, I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily upon the initial discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And accordingly, I covered with a layer what appeared to me as that corruption, and accordingly, I was forced to perforate in order to make the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And accordingly, I discovered again on the other side and did not cease to scrape out the small bone little by little, particularly and carefully perforated the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I scraped around one palm's width from it, and that extracted with its own marrow, and accordingly restored it with medicines, and it consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and section of it except for the disposition of the flesh of it and the scarcity of the tolerance of it and fear of death, because at that time it was happening in all hours due to excessive evacuation and bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore, it is healed through entire healing, and nothing is left in place of hard bone; and it was done well the disposition of it in its own body, and restored to its virtue; and it has been converted into its own dispositions and does not cause contrariety in ambulation or harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is bone that protrudes in place of the body already torn, accordingly you must cut it according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and stretch it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it; and pause that ligament until it becomes thicker than the first one; and accordingly tie that over the flesh that remains on the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you can attract the flesh to the parts left behind, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to suture so that the suture does not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause with a file or table left behind the bone decently, because when you do this it is not forbidden to cut that which does not corrupt the flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the suturing be done over the corrupted area little by little, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, then one must resort to another suture.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is better to uncover the entire surface of the flesh from all parts; and accordingly pause with a file left behind, and accordingly cut that from the first part where there is corruption until the suturing of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the suture be according to the location of the corruption a little bit, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, scrape out that corrupted joint and cut the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, accordingly it is not rational but rather a mistake.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the breast of the arm or leg, it is quite difficult; however, you must inquire into the corruption in what way it appears to you, and then open up that area, and clarify it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with every mistake be rectified by you, when it does not cause contrariety with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that what instruments and cuts are needed to cut into those bones are many according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, size, subtlety, greatness, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, it is necessary for you to prepare all sorts of instruments suitable for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation signifies to you about the type of instrument which you need; when with you is great study and long experience in the ways of this art, and witness to the manners of diseases, for accordingly you had already learned through your own observation what is suitable for each disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And accordingly, you have formed in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which I will pause with as simple ones, and with which I will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	**Forma de serra:**
Forma de autra serra:	**Forma de autra serra:**
Forma de autra serra:	**Forma de autra serra:**
Forma de autra serra gran:	**Forma de autra serra gran:**
Forma de ray:	**Forma de Ray:**
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	**Sia le cap de aquest Ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les punts de lu sian segon la forma dels punts alstefegi.**
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	**E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.**
Forma de razori major dels autres:	**Forma de razori major dels altri:**
Forma de razori menor:	**Forma de razori menor:**
Forma de razori lat:	**Forma de razori lat:**
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	**Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descendant fayt.**
Forma de lu:	**Forma de lu:**
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	**Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:**
Forma de razori autra subtil:	**Forma de razori autra subtil:**
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	**Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:**
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	**Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:**
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	**Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:**
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	**Forma de inscisori autra minor:**
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	**Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a Ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:**
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	**Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:**
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	**E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat:**
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	**E es fayt de ferr de India, e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.**
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	**De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.**
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	**Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.**
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	**E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquella ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.**
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	**E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunes causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.**
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	**E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcion per que ane entro a la ma.**
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	**E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcion entro que prengua en le focil del bras.**
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	**E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.**
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	**E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.**
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	**E semblantment fay del pe quando corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.**
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	**E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.**
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	**Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.**
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	**E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.**
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	**E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.**
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	**E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toche le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.**
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	**Mays si accideys flux de sanc quando obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.**
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	**E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.**
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	**E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio that era asemblada a combustio de foc.**
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	**E aquela corrupcio accidic primiermente en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.**
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	**E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu that atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.**
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	**Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteys
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	**E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo that pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.**
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	**E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.**
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	**E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.**
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	**E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia ajutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.**
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	**De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.**
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	**Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.**
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	**Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.**
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	**E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.**
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	**Mays si tu speras that la codena adheresca e that aquela corrupcio no aya conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.**
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	**E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac that yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que'l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.**
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	**E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.**
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	**E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguada la pudor.**
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	**E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.**
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	**E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.**
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	**E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, laхoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.**
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	**E es that prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz others that hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.**
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	**E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.**
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	**E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, laхoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.**
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	**E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quand le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.**
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	**E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, laхoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.**
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	**E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquellas sobre drap de li.**
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	**E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.**
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	**Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.**
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	**E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot or pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.**
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	**E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o non, e si es en lu apostema.**
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	**E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.**
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	**Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.**
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	**E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.**
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	**E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de quello.**
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	**E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quando
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	**E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.**
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	**E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.**
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	**De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.**
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	**Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.**
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	**E donc quand tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.**
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	**Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addiciones de la ugla vuoydas ja compren las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ugla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquella carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.**
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	**Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanitation que sia en lu le os corrumput.**
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	**E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sant.**
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	**Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ugla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ugla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.**
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	**Mays dit ajustat, le quali es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ugla.**
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	**E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.**
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	**Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.**
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	**E de aqueles que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.**
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	**Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es difficile; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.**
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	**Mays en aquel que es nat en dit, deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelles serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.**
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	**Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquella consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.**
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	**E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatez leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.**
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	**E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.**
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	**De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.**
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	**Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.**
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	**Adonc cove que tu administres purgaçio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.**
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	**Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l'autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.**
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	**La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que veces habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.**
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	**E aprop lia aquella, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.**
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	**E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.**
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	**Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.**
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	**E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.**
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	**E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquella roga declinant a negror.**
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	**E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.**
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	**E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.**
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	**E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.**
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	**E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.**
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	**E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.**
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	**E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.**
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	**E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquella nouncement.**
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	**E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sant.**
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	**E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquella tota.**
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	**E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquella, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquella.**
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	**Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:**
Forma de unci orp:	**Forma de unci orp:**
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	**No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.**
De extraccio venae cruris.	**De extraccio venae cruris.**
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	**Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.**
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	**E fort leu es engendrada en altri locs del cors otra les cambas.**
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	**E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.**
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	**E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.**
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears, you should wrap around it a lead weight of one drachma and two drachmas, and wet it and leave the lead suspended from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	**E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.**
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	**E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquella es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.**
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	**Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.**
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	**E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.**
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	**E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo that is in the materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquella per la curacio de apostemas.**
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	**E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.**
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	**E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.**
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	**De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.**
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	**Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.**
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	**E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.**
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	**E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar cuando el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruyeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.**
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	**E donc quandu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.**
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	**E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.**
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	**May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.**
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	**De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.**
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	**Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.**
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	**E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.**
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	**Yeu fu apelat a uma femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.**
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	**E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aquí stec per una hora.**
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	**E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al altre braç.**
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	**E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.**
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	**E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquella manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.**
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	**Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.**
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	**E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.**
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	**E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.**
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	**E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	**Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquellas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.**
De extraccio de sagetas.	**De extraccio de sagetas.**
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	**Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.**
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	**E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicions, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.**
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	**E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.**
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	**E donc si apareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.**
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	**Mays les senhals de la sageta quando catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.**
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	**E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels that so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.**
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	**E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.**
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	**E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.**
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	**E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es sperança en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.**
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	**E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.**
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	**Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicions quando la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.**
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	**E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.**
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	**La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l'aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.**
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	**E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.**
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	**E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.**
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	**E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .**
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	**E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquella; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicions, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.**
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	**E vi mays un home en le qual cazec uma sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.**
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	**E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicions en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunes de les suas operacions naturals.**
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	**E vi un altre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobat aqui mota dolor, e motzsemblantz ad aquestz.**
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	**E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas seu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.**
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	**E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.**
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	**E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquella; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquella punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.**
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	**E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.**
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	**E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.**
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	**E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.**
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	**E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que aparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre months.**
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	**E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps decentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquellas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquella; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.**
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	**E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sant es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.**
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	**E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las definicions de aquela no so comprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas el libre.**
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	**E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo that es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.**
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	**E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.**
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	**E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.**
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	**E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l'atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.**
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	**E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.**
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	**E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que'l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.**
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	**E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que'l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.**
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	**E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.**
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	**Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.**
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	**Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.**
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	**E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.**
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	**E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen that poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.**
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	**E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.**
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	**E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan les partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquella quar lahoras es alleujada.**
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	**Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.**
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	**E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.**
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	**E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.**
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	**Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per les figures.**
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	**Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partiade les partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partiade pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.**
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	**Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.**
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	**E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.**
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	**E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.**
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	**Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.**
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	**Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impulleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquella, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquella.**
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	**E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves touta la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.**
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	**E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquella e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.**
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	**Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:**
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	**Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quando prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.**
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	**E de aquellas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.**
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	**Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:**
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	**Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:**
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	**Ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.**
De fleubotomia de las venas.	**De fleubotomia de las venas.**
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	**Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx.,** **De las quals so en le cap .xvi.,** **So es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas that so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas that so en doas lacrimals de doas huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas that so en la labia desus; e doas venas that so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas that so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas that so dejos la lengua.**
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	**Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.;** **Quar de aquellas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquella le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquella les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.**
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	**E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquellas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.**
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	**Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.**
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	**E la qualitat de sagnar aquellas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelles en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquellas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.**
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	**Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.**
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	**E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.**
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	**E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de doi ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.**
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	**E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.**
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	**E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquellas e de lor la cauterizacio.**
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	**Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.**
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	**E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquellas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.**
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	**E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitant.**
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	**E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquella coto e pulvils e strenh aquella desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.**
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	**E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquellas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.**
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	**E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.**
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:**
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	**Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquella vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.**
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	**E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.**
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	**Mays le juvament de las dues venas que so als lacrimals de doi huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.**
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquellas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.**
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	**E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.**
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	**E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquellas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquellas.**
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	**Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.**
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.**
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	**Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquella es restaurada leugierment.**
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	**Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.**
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquellas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.**
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	**E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.**
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	**E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quand la plagua es sanada.**
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	**E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.**
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquellas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquellas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.**
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	**Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquellas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquellas, e de la pus manifesta de aquellas.**
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	**E fay le semblant de las doas venas that so en las labias desus.**
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	**Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas that so en la labia dejos.**
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	**Mays de doas venas that so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios that so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.**
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	**E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquellas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.**
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	**E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	**E las tuas venas that so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:**
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	**E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquellas.**
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	**Forma de fleubotomi mirti:**
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	**Sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquellas que conteno sanc gros torbat.**
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	**E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:**
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	**E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils that conteno sanc subtil citri.**
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	**Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias that so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.**
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	**E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, that guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove that no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.**
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	**E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove that tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.**
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	**Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras that toches le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bra
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	**E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.**
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	**E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.**
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	**E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.**
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	**Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes that thou art not present medicine ad hoc, lahoras tu inscideys the arteria, si appar to thee; quar the extremity of it is contracted, and is abscinded the blood; or that thou takest a handful of fistic, and feneth it, and taketh one third part thereof, and strenhest it upon the place of the vein with strictura descending am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.**
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	**E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.**
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	**E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicions per le loc petit de la plaga e la possibilitat del liament del braço.**
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	**Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.**
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	**E cove al fleubotomant aquella que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.**
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	**E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.**
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	**Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.**
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	**E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.**
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	**Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia that guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.**
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	**Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.**
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	**Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquella e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.**
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	**Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per sperança de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primavera, sobre dejun en primavera e autunnne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de repleció.**
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	**E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres hours.**
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	**Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenienza e necesitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.**
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	**E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.**
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	**E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove that mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.**
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	**E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz nauça sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.**
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	**E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.**
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	**E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibit, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.**
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	**E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.**
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	**E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.**
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	**E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.**
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	**E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.**
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	**E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aque
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	**E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.**
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	**E aprop la strictura, cove that aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps between lor entro that las venas sian infladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.**
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	**E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquella es streyta.**
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	**E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.**
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	**E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.**
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	**Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.**
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	**E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.**
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	**E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.**
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	**Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna cause; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna parti
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	**E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les altre olis.**
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	**E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquellas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.**
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	**E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquella veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquella per una hora, quar es dissolvut.**
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	**E cove that fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.**
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	**E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna cause de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.**
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	**E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas eeminences deves fleubotomia de la basilica.**
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	**E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.**
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	**E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l'autra curacio entro que sia sanit.**
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	**E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.**
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	**Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.**
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	**E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha nécessitade extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.**
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	**E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.**
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	**E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, non punctura.**
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	**E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.**
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	**E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.**
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	**E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.**
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	**E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.**
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	**E usa de las autras causas that havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.**
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	**E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.**
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	**Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii hours or nine of the first flebotomie.**
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	**Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove that sia eventat in the second day or third.**
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	**Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove that sia gitat de lu sanc in one occasion and a great quantity be shed and the warning be amplified until syncope occurs, more than you have preserved all the conditions of flebotomia; and that you pause your hand over the pulse of the blood to prevent death instead of syncope, for many occasions end badly when the phlebotomist is ignorant and neglectful.**
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	**E no cove when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood second time, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is difficult to issue the blood, that you press upon it with vehemence and bend it slightly, for this is too bad.**
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	**Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi that es coagulat del sanc in the orrifici of the vein; or pause sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress it with compression light entro que el sanc sia fora yssit.**
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	**E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques until the apostema is sedat.**
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	**E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna quello sobre aquel loc or in autre bras in autre vena.**
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	**E la vena apelada “funis del bras” is phlebotomed in loc of the fusca or of the basilica, when not obstructed or hidden, for it is composed of those.**
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es that the patient introduces his hand into cold water until the pulse becomes more visible and the vein appears manifestly.**
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	**E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liement am strictura magnifico; e aprop fleubotoma segond le transvers petit, non latitudinally nor according to the longitude.**
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	**E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia with the which thou fleubotomas that one on the junction of the arm and small.**
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	**E si es prohibido el flux de sangre, lahoras tu itera la mano en agua fría y deja que la sangre corre en el agua hasta que consigues lo que necesitas.**
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	**Mays if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and the month is paused the flow of blood in cold water in winter.**
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	**And the phlebotomy of this vein is more safe than all other veins, because it leaves you with no pulsating vein or nerve.**
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	**And the phlebotomy of the vein of the right arm is corresponding to the diseases of the liver.**
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	**And the quality of the phlebotomy at that time is that you strengthen your hand with intent or with your own hand, more than you have put it in cold water, until the vein is swollen and clearly demonstrated; and then you will cut across, and if you do not see anything there, you will not be satisfied with this.**
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	**And be careful not to finish your hand with the phlebotomy, because you leave it so that the nerves of the fingers are exposed and bare.**
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	**And then move your hand into cold water and let the blood flow freely in it, for if you do not move your hand into cold water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein and be prohibited from flowing.**
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	**And since the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you should pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated abruptly; and similarly, you should do the same for all other veins.**
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	**But the judgment of the phlebotomy of that on the left arm is that it corresponds to the diseases of the gallbladder.**
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	**And do the same in the phlebotomy of this one, just as you have done in the other.**
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	**And the judgment of the phlebotomy is related to diseases that are located in the lower part of the body, just like those of the kidneys, and also to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the throat, and ulcers of old sores and joints, and their similar maladies.**
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	**And the quality of the phlebotomy at that time is that the patient puts his foot in cold water and presses on it until the veins appear; then he places himself on the joint of the foot with a cord, and the location of the vein is marked by a dot on the said foot, and from there it branches out in the face of the foot like a bunch of ramps.**
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	**And therefore phlebotomize the most ample vein below the knee, at the spot where the aggregation of blood is greatest, for it is better and more suitable.**
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	**And if you phlebotomize that on the face of the foot, then you should beware of the nerves that are below it on the face of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy as if you were to incise it.**
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	**And be the phlebotomy vain.**
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	**But if the bleeding is prohibited; then you should put the foot of that one in cold water and let the blood flow freely into it until it is evacuated.**
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	**And if the phlebotomist erred in the first attempt, then you should go back to the phlebotomy and do it a little more, for the spot is sore; and don't worry about the malady, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.**
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	**And similarly do the same for the saphenous vein of the other foot as well.**
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	**And for the sciatic vein, the spot as we have said is below the tail of the partition of the wild forest.**
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	**And the judgment of the phlebotomy at that time is to be careful not to let blood flow when it is cautious.**
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	**And the quality of the phlebotomy at that time is that the patient should enter a bath, and hasten and strengthen the vein of that one from the lat to the width of the ankle up to the four fingers in a subtle band, so that it appears only through that.**
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	**And therefore, when it appears, then you should phlebotomize that one according to each individual's nature that is possible for you and according to the traverse, and it is better; or incise that one by incision or secede that one by section, because the spot of that one is sore.**
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	**And it is in the midst of men like a woman; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to your sense, then you should phlebotomize some branch of that one, and it is that which appears on the two sides of the foot below the said auricular and anular.**
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	**And beware of the nerves, and let blood flow in the quantity that you desire.**
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	**And approach the structure and pause over the spot of the phlebotomy cut and strengthen the spot, so that slightly it is healed.**
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	**Of the advantages and qualities of using those things.**
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	**Ventozations are of combs, or of horns, or of veerings.**
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	**And ventozation is done in two ways: one of them is by scarification and blood extraction, and the other is by ventozation without scarification.**
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	**And this ventozation that is without scarification is done in two ways, because one is with fire and the other is without fire.**
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	**And the 14 locations of the body where bloodletting with scarification and blood extraction is administered are: one in the area where pauses are made, which is the occipital bone at the back of the head; and the middle location between the two parts of the neck; and bloodletting below the mandible just below the mouth; and bloodletting on both sides of the mento; and bloodletting on the alohoster, which is located above the coccyx; and bloodletting at the end of the coccyx; and bloodletting at two points, each of which is located between two arm bones; and bloodletting on both sides of the pelvis; and bloodletting on both sides of the hipbones.**
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	**And bloodletting does not extract blood from the large veins, but rather from the small, scattered veins in the flesh, and therefore it is not a method for purging the body through those means, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary to perform bloodletting with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion, until the entire body is evacuated.**
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	**However, if necessity arises due to illness or continuity, we shall administer the bloodletting at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at some other time.**
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	**The cause is because men are in those which blood is multiplied until they reach the limit of extraction through bloodletting and find heaviness and sadness in their head, and from there it spreads to their face, neck, and chest; and from there it spreads to their forehead and temples, causing darkness and numbness in their eyes; and from there it spreads to the location of their bloodletting; and from there their laughter is multiplied; and from there they find a taste of blood in their mouth, or that their tongue is swollen and they spit out blood; and from there their sleep is multiplied, and from there they see blood in their dreams, and from there they have visions of old and ancient things, and other causes similar to theirs.**
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	**And therefore when the moon is in its third or middle phase, we order bloodletting to be done more than two or three hours after sunrise.**
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	**And the judgment of bloodletting from the neck is that when it causes gravity in the head and down to the eyes; however, it is necessary that this be done after a thorough evacuation of the entire body.**
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	**And this bloodletting is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.**
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	**And it is not permitted to use it on one who has a complete blockage or in whom there is catarrh, because it would give rise to great harm.**
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	**And therefore it is not necessary to use that on the elderly, and in those whose heads are afflicted with serious diseases.**
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	**But if one is continuing on that and it is done over there, forgetfulness ensues; and therefore you must command the bloodletting attendant to pause for a moment before opening the next vein, lest forgetfulness occur.**
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	**But bloodletting from the alkehel is in the location of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and basilica: and therefore it gives rise to asthma, constriction of the lung, scissura of the larynx, cough, and repletion.**
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	**And it is necessary that the bloodletting from the alkehel be done in a small amount, for if it is paused afterwards, it will engender weakness in the chest and stomach.**
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	**And the bloodletting from alhagdahan gives rise to accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, emigration, precocity, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilica.**
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	**And it is necessary that you command the bloodletting attendant to not press his hand with scarification, so that he does not cut into the artery and cause a flow of blood.**
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	**And bloodletting after the tongue gives rise to ulcers in the mouth, corruption of the gingiva, and similar afflictions as those that are in the mouth; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the aliheric vein which is in the two lips.**
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	**But the bloodletting that is done on both spatulas gives rise to caphatan, which is caused by an excess of warmth.**
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	**And the bloodletting from both parts of the dentals gives rise to a judgment about the phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca and cephalica, because that attracts the blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from other larger veins until it reaches an attraction to the three veins.**
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	**And command the bloodletting attendant not to proceed too quickly with scarification, for the location is stripped of flesh and leaves only nerves and arteries.**
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	**And it is a bloodletting in which one is bled over the ashoses and gives rise to hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.**
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	**And it is necessary that you command the bloodletting attendant to be a great bloodletting, and of eram, because the location demands strong section; and strong, subtle bloodlettings are torn, and be scarified with scarification.**
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	**But small bloodlettings from the knees, manifestly so, because they attract the blood of all the body, and give rise to old pains in the lungs and the belly, and the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and give rise to bothor and demil; and are located in the location of phlebotomy of two saphenas, and alahorcoben, and two cavilhas.**
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	**However, they can damage the entire body and cause syncopal episodes in many men.**
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	**And the judgment of the alahorcoben bloodletting is similar to the judgment on the bloodlettings of two knees.**
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	**And the quality of the position of the bloodlettings is that one pauses the bleeding at the beginning, and sucks it up slowly with a gentle suction, and does not prolong the position of the bloodlettings, but rather pauses them slightly, and holds them quietly, and allows the humors to come forth naturally.**
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	**And do not cease iterating until you see the location already reddened and inflated, and that the rigor of the blood appears.**
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	**And when you are ready, scarify and iterate the suction gradually, and carefully consider the disposition of the body.**
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	**Because that man who has tender skin and few pores, you must scarify him only once and not again, so that the location is not ulcerated.**
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	**And command the bloodletting attendant to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and then apply suction with ease.**
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	**And if the blood is thickened, then it is necessary to scarify twice, because in the first scarification, the way of subtlety to the blood and its satiation is opened.**
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	**But in the second scarification, one must carefully scrutinize the extraction of the thick blood.**
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	**And if the blood is very foul, then it is necessary to make a third scarification in order to achieve the desired result.**
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	**And finally, when we want to extract the blood gradually or in small quantities, it is enough for us to make one scarification.**
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	**And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we will scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify slowly and carefully.**
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	**And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision as much only.**
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	**And if the incision is large, hard, and red, and its pores are very tight, it is necessary to lubricate the locations of the bloodletting with a gentle, open, and resolving oil; if it is in the summer, then use olive oil, or violet oil, or almond oil, or chamomile oil; and if it is in the winter, then use birch oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and to those similar.**
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	**And if the superfluity is great, fresh, then the oil should be amaranth, or balm of Gilead, or olive oil, or aniseed oil, and to those similar.**
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	**But if the bloodletting attendant has large pores of tender skin, then it is necessary that he be prohibited from using oil, and it is necessary that he apply water or fresh water from a source such as saltwater, cow's milk, or borehole water to the locations of bloodletting, and similar waters to those.**
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	**And that person whose blood is very wet, washes his bloodletting tools with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar waters to those.**
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	**And that person whose superfluities are great, washes his bloodletting tools with old vinegar, or water of Sancho, which is majorana, or decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar waters to those.**
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	**And it is necessary to keep the bloodletting before dinner; having to be administered about one hour or two hours before dinner, and it is necessary that he sleeps near the bloodletting.**
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	**What is the need that one must regulate the bloodletting before bleeding?**
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	**And consider at the beginning: then if the bloodletting attendant or he who must bleed is choleric and prone to inflammation of the blood, then it is necessary that he takes cooling causes, such as mugwort, bitter orange peel, endive with vinegar, lettuce, and scallion, and similar remedies.**
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	**And pause from their foods, such as potage, and fowl flesh, and prepared dishes with spices, and similar remedies.**
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	**And that person whose complexion is fresh, should take in drinking essence of almond or essence of alkanet seeds, and sumac, and wine with a mild scent between Easter and Christmas; and it is recommended that he uses moderation in drinking and eating, and pause from foods like potage, cabbage, and small birds and pigeons.**
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	**And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and bleeding, drink should be greater than food.**
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	**And it is necessary that he be given to drink in some hours before certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicinal herbs of musc, so that the musketa is made, or alcelita before bloodletting or near it, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is subtilized; and it is not necessary for them to take those scalded.**
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	**But the bloodletting that is called scarification is bloodletting that is paused on the liver, and on the gallbladder and podagra, and on the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the plexus of the spine, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon themselves.**
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	**And it is not sought after by those who have blood flow disease of the nose, but rather atraction of blood from member, such as pausing bleeding on mammary gland in the illness of bloody flux of the nose; and we use that to dissolve fresh viscosity of member, such as pausing on the abdomen and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and cools it and relieves pain which is resolved by dissolving.**
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	**And it is paused over the tonsils when they are obstructed or swollen, because by virtue of strong attraction it opens up obstruction and eradicates swelling from its place.**
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	**And similarly, it does when paused over the liver and gallbladder to dissolve venosity in those who are enclosed.**
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	**And these bloodlettings are administered with suction only, and sometimes with heat.**
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	**And sometimes they are administered full of hot water in cases of gallbladder disease.**
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	**And this is why the bloodletting is filled and made greater, whether it is with cold water alone or water in which certain herbs are steeped to suitable proportions.**
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	**Form of bloodletting administered with heat: the width of the orifice should be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the point should be half a palm; and it should be in the lat part of the instrument, in the place where it is in the circuit, one quarter of the instrument, the hole should be small according to the amount that an awl can enter into it.**
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	**It should be made of earthenware or citrine, with thick borders, lion, equal and third parts, in order that it may not disturb the member's position on it.**
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	**And it should be in the middle of a transverse beam made of earth or iron, where a candle is placed with fire.**
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	**And it is this bloodletting that is greater than the one we have recommended, and the small amount of blood that flows from it according to the diseases and state of the person who uses it.**
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	**And the bloodlettings of the elderly and exhausted are different from those of the young and robust.**
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	**And the quality of pausing this bloodletting with fire on the member is that it extends the ember with firewood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and pauses it over the middle of the transverse beam in the middle location of the bloodletting, so that the fire be kindled around the part left over so that it may not burn the patient's body.**
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	**And it is placed over the member of the patient, and the said thing is on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we have bloodletting and do not need to open the hole and let the vapor rise over that hole, then the bloodletting will be dissolved.**
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	**And blow gently with the ember according to its manner, and repeat that if you need it.**
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	**But in bloodletting that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, where there is no transverse beam or hole, and it is not administered except when it is filled with water, and it is placed over the member only.**
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	**And this is the form of it: And as this bloodletting grows greater, so too does its quality, for it can receive a large quantity of water.**
Capitol .xcvii.	**Chapter XCIX**
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	**Bloodlettings are not administered on fleshy members, but only on those where it is not possible to apply bloodletting cups, due to the small size of the vessels, similar to the blood vessels of the mouth and gums; or in a denuded member without flesh, similar to the nose and its surroundings.**
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	**And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting cups which are in the waters of digestion and purgation.**
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	**And it is left the day and night in water until they are famished, and no cause remains in the belly of those; and it is evacuated the body by phlebotomy and bloodletting; and the member of the patient is thoroughly washed until it becomes red; and it is placed on it.**
E cum son umplidas e caso.	**And when they are filled and stopped.**
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	**And if it is possible to suck out the place with bloodletting, it is more direct in judgment.**
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	**And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and water, and be squeezed and expressed.**
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	**And if the blood is prolonged in the body near the closure of the bloodletting cups, and this liquid begins to run out, then put a cloth soaked in cold water on it, and keep it there until the bleeding stops.**
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	**And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle vitriol powder or powdered gallnuts and similar substances of stiptic causes over it, until the blood is absorbed; or place the warm poultices on the location and leave them until they adhere to the location, and the blood is absorbed.**
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	**And thus, if necessary, iteration of bloodletting cups, when it is possible to change those.**
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	**And if the bloodletting cups are prohibited from suspension, then wash the location with recent blood or leave an acupuncturist's needle in the area until there is bleeding; and be careful, because those that feel some blood will soon absorb it.**
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	**And when you want to stop them, sprinkle a little bit of powdered aloes, or salt, or ashes, and then cauterize.**
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	**Thus begins the third part: of restoration.**
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	**This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in the bones.**
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	**Oh, foolish son, understand that those who boast about this chapter are the ignorant doctors and common people, and those who have not read the books of the Ancients nor glanced at a letter from them.**
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	**And because of this reason, it is made that this method of the sages in our land is private; and you must not forget it at any time, nor attribute anything to chance, but only through the prolonged reading of the books of the Ancients and study on their understanding, until I extract the science from them.**
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	**And thus, I have directed my efforts towards experiment and study in the length of my own life.**
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	**And you have already been described in this chapter all that contains my science and on which my experiment has passed; therefore, I have briefly presented it to you others and released it from the occupation of elongation; and have summarized it at the end of summarization; and have shown it at the end of declaration; and have formed it into many forms of instruments that are administered in this way, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I did in two previous chapters.**
Capitol primier.	**Chapter One.**
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	**Summary and collections from fractured bones, for which a previous necessity is required before we begin to remember the members of fractures and their various forms.**
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	**Therefore, let us say in the preamble to this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and let us consider the headings under which the artists are forced to stand at attention regarding the truth of these matters; so it is you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art, other than yourselves.**
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	**And thus I say that when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twisting or separation, then it is necessary for you to turn back to the beginning with phlebotomy or to alleviate that, or whatever else together, if no obstacle prevents it, just as debility of virtue, or the one who suffers it, or old age, or time of intense heat, or of intense cold.**
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	**And thus it is content in its own food of fresh herbs and fowl meat and crabs; and prohibit gross meats and fill them with viands and all manner of food that fills the veins of blood, until you are secure from apostema and if not fear effusion of matter to the member.**
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	**And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they are accustomed to.**
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	**And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of great and strong and heavy consistency, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, and similar substances, and also meat, fish, and eggs, and thick soups, and milk of cows, and juices of fresh fruits, and all sorts of food that are similar to these, and under this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture is done more easily and gently.**
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	**And you should know that the bones are brittle when they are in old men who are in their first old age and in those who are decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of the members of theirs.**
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	**And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the desiccation of those members, and they continue and consolidate those that are from them in the end of old age, just as the bones of small children.**
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	**But nature adjusts and connects the broken bone of all parts without any similar cause, like glue that thickens and adheres to it, until it is conjoined and joined together, until the end of fortitude and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, until no cause prevents that from its works.**
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	**And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which are gravity and viscosity and thickness, just as we have said.**
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	**Many different kinds of fractures according to the diversity of the member.**
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	**And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the femur is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the foot is different from a fracture of the arm; and similarly all the other members are different between them.**
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	**And you should remember all the species of fracture, exposed in its own chapter distinct from others.**
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	**Many different kinds of fracture in itself.**
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	**And the species of fracture are diversified in their own kinds; for there is a curved fracture and another that occurs in the stars; and some times it is made according to the length of the bone: and these are fractures of the satagia and astelhas and additio
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	**And every species has its own unique pain or torment in the process of restoration, according to the distinct memory of each place.**
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	**Many signs of bone fracture.**
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	**And for this reason it is known that there is a fracture of the bone: it is the twisting of the bone, and the prominence or swelling of the bone to the sense, and when you compress the bone with your hand.**
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	**And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting or prominence and you do not feel a sense of resistance when you touch the bone with agitation, nor does the patient experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.**
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	**It is possible that there may be twisting or small fissure, therefore it does not matter if you compress the bone with your hand and all its surroundings; but rather pause over it, taking into account the medicines of which there is memory in this moment, which corresponds to this place; and so be strict by subtle subtlety.**
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	**And you should know that the place when it is curved and not split in two or another way that does not occur in the satagia, as all parts of its comparison are remade, then it is necessary to begin from your hour to correct it, having taken into account what will happen apostema caution.**
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	**And if apostema caution occurs at that place, then let it be left for several days until the apostema ceases; and then equalize it according to each manner that you can with lightness and ingenuity.**
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	**And you should know that the restoration and equalization of the bone is easier than in the case where satagia occurs.**
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	**And so strengthen that according to what will come in the memory of it.**
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	**However, if in the bone there are satagias, then it is necessary to extend this broken member of two parts, whether it be the arm or leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or one rope and hand.**
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	**And be in the position with which you pause the member in its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then you will be forced to return those additions with ingenuity and according to each manner that you can in their places.**
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	**And take care to follow your strength, so that what you do does not harm the patient through your operation or injury; and strive according to your power to apply one bone to another, their companion in better forms.**
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	**And it is necessary that at that hour you act with profit and touch that place with your hand, and if there is some other cause here, correct that and equalize that according to the quantity of your virtue.**
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	**And excessive extension and compression, just as foolish doctors often do, which cause apostema caution to occur through their operation, or cause contraction in the member, just as we have seen before through the operation of theirs.**
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	**And thus, annecteys, equacio, and decent operation, with strict attention to that member, and rest and tranquility; remind the patient about this and ensure that they do not suffer harm in their waking hours or sleep, and observe their revolution and agitation, and note their digestion, and note all their movements with all your virtue; and wait until the position of the member is in a state where it is ensured that there will be no pain, which causes discomfort when one is in the disposition of the position of the member due to injury or lesion. Then, you must change that condition to another one where they do not feel pain; and take care that the position of that place is right and equal, so that the member does not become twisted when it is restored.**
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	**And the quality of the strictura of the member at rest is that which you recommend; because you know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.**
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	**And of those that are small, like the arm and leg and foot, it is necessary that the wrapping be made of very fine cloth.**
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	**But those that are large, like the thigh or leg, it is necessary that they be wrapped in a thick and strong cloth, because the gentle wrapping connects the large member and strengthens it from all parts with a strict equalization, so that nothing enters into it.**
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	**And thus, begin, and with your evacuation of equacio, pause momentarily convenient to that place, over the location of that fracture with three or four wraps as the member requires; and strengthen your hand a little with the wrapping.**
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	**And thus, come to that part of the location of the fracture which is most superior, and strengthen more than not so as to keep your strictura with which you have strengthened the location of the fracture.**
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	**And thus, stretch yourself to the wrapping of the location of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the strictura bit by bit, until you take from it a great part.**
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	**And thus, take another bandage and wrap it around that other spot on the broken location with wrapping, and thus come to the wraps at the most distant part of the fracture; and be your operation in the strictura of the wrapping and in mollification of that according to what we have said in the first wrapping above.**
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	**And thus, pause between the wrappings of stopa leon or cloth with which the twisting of the fracture is equalized, if there is twisting in it; and if not, you do not pause.**
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	**And thus, pause over another bandage, and thus equalize over these wrapping stars made decently soon, if in the location there is no inflammation or cautionary apostema, and then pause over that which seats the apostema and prevents the inflation; and leave it for a few days; and then you strengthen over those stars.**
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	**And the stars of the wrapping are made of the middle part of canna lada reed, and well formed; or they are made of ash wood; or of palm tree branches; and the width of each star is according to this form and figure:**
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	**However, it is necessary that the star which is paused over that fracture be a bit larger and thicker than the other stars, and the length of the star according to what is measured by the member in magnitude and smallness; and thus strengthen over the stars with another bandage according to your first strictura; and thus bind above with a cord decently according to what we have said about strictura, and it should be your strictura according to the location of the fracture more, and as much as is lengthened from the fracture, so much less the strictura.**
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	**And it is necessary that the threads be of a moderate thickness and subtlety, and be made of silk; and if the threads are thick, just as I have seen in the operation of certain foolish people who pause their threads with cords of twisted silk, and it is a great error, when the strictura is not in equalization.**
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	**And it is not necessary to use very fine threads, because you will not consecrate with them according to the strictura that you want, and it does not matter if between star and star there are less than a digit.**
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	**And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stars to the strictura in its own locations, then pause with those of stopa leon or woolly camel hair until it does not cause harm.**
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	**In some cases, the fracture is accompanied by a plague, and accidents of disruption occur in the code, and you will come with remembrance in that one in the capital according to singularity.**
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	**And you should know that not every broken member is strengthened with stars on the first day; the reason being that the member, when it is large, does not need to be paused over by stars immediately, but rather after a few days or seven or more, according to your safety precautions for cautionary apostema.**
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	**And this is the method of the ointments with which the Ancients restored, which are paused over fractures and dislocations and torsions.**
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	**Method of ointment like a refreshing balm for the restoration of fracture, suitable for many complexities and most particularly for women and children, since it is applied to that which does not feel heat or cold: and it is that you take from powder of millstone, and it is the marrow of the flour that falls off the movement of the millstone in the walls of the mill.**
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	**And thus it is comfortable as it is, unless you sift through it with an album of honey, and pause the thickening or thinning; and then use it.**
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for applying an ointment to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the essence of sage, one drachma ten; of myrrh and aloes, one drachma five; of alochil, one drachma twenty; all are mixed with water or album of hog's gall if the patient's complexion is scorched; and then use this ointment, which has a good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives strength to old men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for applying an ointment that restores fractures and twists: recipe of myrrh and white altai, one drachma ten; of myrrh and aloe, one drachma five; of acacia, one drachma six; of Armenian balsam, one drachma twenty.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	**All are to be pounded in a mortar with a wooden pestle, and sifted, and mixed with water or honey, and administered.**
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	**Method of ointment for joints and bones separated from their places, and sudden pain occurring in those and fissures and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in sweet wine and olive oil and pause over the location.**
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	**But in this ointment there is no virtue of restoration, of cautionary apostema and propelling out pains properly.**
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	**Another method of ointment that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix all together and make an ointment from them.**
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	**Short method of ointment to be administered for the restoration of fracture of bone and when you desire resolution of the remnant of apostema: recipe razed from alta, camomile, flowers of violets, flour of ears, all mixed together.** **And all are to be pounded and mixed with wine, if the member is not scarred.**
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	**But if it is scarred, labor and comfort that one with water of colandro moist or with water and use of lead.**
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	**Another method of ointment more powerful in resolution than the first, when apostema persists and hinders the restoration of the member: recipe razed from alta and seed of lily, and balm, melilot, majoram, flowers of violet, camomile, all mixed together.**
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	**But Hippocrates does not advise freely that it should be applied to the member torn apart for its restoration, but rather a composition of wax and oil is made and no other cause; and recommends that it should be mixed between grossness and subtlety.**
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	**But at Gualia it is seen that it should be applied to the member torn apart for its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with a small degree of heat like myrrh, onions, and similar substances are used just as those causes which have been recommended.**
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	**Method of ointment that comforts lesions and pain: recipe mixed with cypress, human hair shaved or bird's feather, and alta, and salt, all mixed together; pound and sifted and mixed, and made into an ointment.**
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	**But the quantity according to which it should be left to remain in the wound and how it should be divided is that you consider whether there is not pain or pruritus or if the bone is broken and not in its place, then you do not want to leave it for many days.**
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	**And if it happens that a violent pain or pruritus or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should withdraw or remove that in the hour, and stop the application of the ointment.**
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	**And take linen cloth and marine sponge lioness wet, and immerse that in boiling water, and with that wash the location until the pruritus ceases and the pain is calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then pause over it with fine wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or red oil, and lie on it for a night until you are sure of caution from apostema, and that inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain of it is eased.**
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	**And then gently iterate that subtle stricture and small ointment, and do not strain it with your first constriction, and subtlety apply it until it is healed.**
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	**And if at times the apostema and the rigor and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are completely gone, and you need ointment and stricture, then you should iterate that in the same way as you did at the beginning equally.**
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	**And if there is no cause in the member that we have said, then you should not leave it until at least three or four or five or seven days.** **and some times everything is left for 20 days according to how it appears to you by the relaxation of the member, just as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on that.**
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	**And then adjust in the stricture more than your first constriction all, and adjust in the thickening of the flesh of the patient, according to how it is preceded by the remembrance of that.**
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	**But if you find the location of the fracture already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching that; and therefore, take up that with boiling water every time you remove that; and do this for all three days; and relax the stricture a little, and by this operation, the nourishment reaches the member, and is healed gradually.**
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	**But this is what foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do another way when it is not restored at first, according to what is right, and is restored in a tortuous manner, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if they had written this out fully, the Ancients would have added more to this.**
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	**And I have not seen anyone of them do this, therefore it is more reasonable that this does not happen.**
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	**Chapter 2: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.**
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	**The species of fractures are many, and the figures of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by percussion of space, and the percussion breaks all the bone into small pieces, leaving it like a stick, and therefore this species is called asciatical; or the space insinuates itself into some part of the bone, and insinuates itself into the flesh and does not pass through to the other side; and this species of fracture is called levatio absoluta.**
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	**And the wound of these two fractures is either great or small, and of fracture that is concave or convex; and cause of it is percussion with a hammer or falling on the forehead, and to their likenesses.**
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	**And this fracture is either penetrating, which approaches the panniculus (fatty tissue) that is left behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is either great or small.**
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	**And the fracture is one that is split in the bone, in the subtlety of hair small, and therefore it is named this species fracture capillary.**
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	**And it is a fracture that is caused by falling or percussion of the forehead and similar, which causes some bone plate to enter into the inward parts, and is done in the concavity as if it were happening to the skulls of the ancient ones when they were hit by percussion and their entrance was broken into the inward parts.**
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	**And most of the time it is done in the skulls of human beings, just as if they were made by children.**
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	**And all these types of fractures that are scattered, are as bad as stars separated.**
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	**And you will remember everything about this in its place.**
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	**And you will know all these species of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry into their causes and showing the corrupted flesh that is on them.**
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	**And the species of fracture capillar is known by this that it is discovered on the bone, and it is wiped away, and it is lined over there with a tent, because the fracture appears black.**
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	**But in the treatment of fracture, consider first the accidents of the patient, and then if you find that they are accompanied by manifest signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, absence of speech, syncope, acute fever, and swelling of the eyes and rigor of those, and similar manifestations to theirs in greater dispositions, unless the doctor is not cured.**
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	**And if there are non-corresponding accidents, you hope for salvation, then you begin the treatment of him.**
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	**The cause is that if it has come to you like a plague in the beginning as it is plagued and this is on the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study in the examination of the bone before the 14th day according to all disposition.**
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	**And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you cover the bone before the 7th day, having that which is left on the bone be corrupted by the panniculus, and that accidents occur as we have recommended.**
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	**And if the fracture has already penetrated to the panniculus and covered the brain, and is in small parts and concavity, then it is necessary that you inscribe the comminuted and attrited part, according to what I have recommended to you.**
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	**And that you reason with the patient's head plagued, and discover on the bone according to custom and manner to your possibility, and that it be lighter on the patient.**
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	**And if it happens to you that the detection of the bone is required, or there is a flow of blood or an abscess that is warm, then you should oppose yourself to it in accordance with what is necessary, and do as follows: fill the wound with infusions of vinegar and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is sedated, and ensure that the flow of blood is stopped; and begin with the excision of the bone and the removal of the affected area.**
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	**And it should be done according to one of two ways of operation.**
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	**And the one way is that you inscribe the bone with an inscription of straight line, and this is the form of it: And then administer another inscription to this, a little more late than that; and this is the form of it:**
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	**And then administer the inscription, but later than the second.**
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	**And it is necessary that you have different inscriptions, some of which are longer than others; and some of theirs are shorter than the others and are in the later stage of their extremities, and are made of iron or lead.**
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	**And use them according to their facility in percussion on the inscription, so that it does not concuss the head and lead it astray.**
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	**And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circle of it before you administer the inscriptions with the non-profound tunnels.**
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	**And they are not called so simply because those do not stop the term of the bone from reaching to that which is near it, for this reason the tunnel is rounded extremity or margin on that which is left the head of it, resembling a margin or little circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.**
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	**And it is convenient that you take many of these tunnels, each one fitting the particular shape of some bone, until you are present in all the tests of the skull, the edge of which is sharp, and the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of the shape of this test.**
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	**And this is the form of three species of tunnels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the tunnel on the bone and revolve it with those same words until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then permit the tunnel to pass to another place, and pause there where it is between all the holes the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around it.**
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	**And then inscribe with inscriptions that are between each hole of the bone, and make it more subtle than you can on this side in the end of levitation, just as we have said, until you radiate the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared to this, such as tweezers and forceps.**
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	**And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the inscriber does not touch any cause of the ciphac.**
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	**And therefore, when you have perforated the bone with the tunnel, and it is separated from the ciphac if it continues to it, and you will have that extracted, it is necessary that you reason and equalize it in the roughness of it with another instrument similar to an inscriber, but more powerful and more subtle than the others.**
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	**And if there remains some small part of the bones, it is necessary that you take it with ease with the tools that are yours; and then cure the wound with linens and bandages which we have said.**
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	**And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which says Gualia and praises it greatly; and this is its sermon: necessary is to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone at the place where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and have paused there with the end of this inscriber, slow and happy, which has this form:**
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	**And it is that the lenticular part is lion and does not inscribe any cause, and the acute part is two inches in length on either side before reaching the end of the bone, as times; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the ciphac with the face of the acute part in the bone.**
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	**And then strike with the inscriber on one side with a small hammer until you have inscribed all the bone with ease just as it is revolved, and you are sure of the padding that no accident will happen to you in any way, and if the medicant14 were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their own; certainly, even if he were asleep.**
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	**And therefore, if there remains any cause annexed to the bone of the padding in some places of the bone, inscribe it with the end of the inscriber that is lenticular, and deliver it with ease, because it is delivered from its trouble and fear.**
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	**And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the padding, and what is abscessed or is left behind from the bone is the face of it, and remains in roughness and subtlety, then it is necessary that you smooth out that roughness and radiate those subtleties with razors subtle by which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it may be possible to administer those in every place the most convenient for them and the most right according to what has puzzled you your operation on that broken bone and its figure.**
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	**And it is necessary that you administer in your reason with which you sharpen the bone at the beginning with the most rough of those razors, and then use the most subtle one of them, and do not cease to do so according to continuity until you arrive at administering the most powerful and the most subtle of all.**
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	**But in any of the other small fractures, capillary and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer cure according to what has puzzled you for rectification of it.**
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	**And it is a cause that is not fully understood by all those who have studied in that art.**
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	**And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.**
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	**And if the padding is rectangular when you radiate the bone, then it is necessary that you take a cloth from it according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rosy oil, and pause it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth doubled or tripled and submerge it in vinegar and rosy oil, and pause it over the first cloth and make it as smooth as possible so that you do not injure the ciphac; and then administer a binding bandage over it, and do not tighten it except by the quantity of the wound as much as is necessary.**
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	**And leave it with this cure for one day or two until you are sure of a post-emptive caution; and then remove it and administer medicines with which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as razings of flax and farina of ears, and powder of senses and aristology, and similar things to those.**
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	**And it is that you should make a powder of these medicines which is powdered over the wound, just as they are dry; and universally, administer in that all medicine with properties of which one cleanses and does not bite.**
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	**And keep yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and not be in a surdica of enguent or other; nor leave viral inflammation to arise there; for when it is adjusted over the padding of the skull, corrupts that and spoils that, and brings evil upon the patient from nearby malignant malice.**
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	**And evil occurs in the skull of the head, as if the bone is blackened and most especially when the cure is neglected, and there is darkness on the surface; and therefore consider now if evil befalls the patient with the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious for all doubt.**
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	**And if there is no blackness but from the medicine that is paused above, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then you should take three parts of honey and three parts of rosy oil.** **And with those lines, make a cloth, and then pause it over the skull; and then cure that with the species of cure that is needed until it is healed.**
Capitol .iii.	It seems we've reached the end of Chapter 3!
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	A new chapter!
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	It seems we're getting into the nitty-gritty of nasal anatomy!
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	It seems like we're getting a description of how to treat a broken nose!
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	It seems like we're getting some final advice on how to perform the nasal manipulation technique!
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	It seems like we're getting some more specific guidance on how to treat a broken nose!
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	It seems like we're getting some guidance on how to treat a broken nose with two separate fractures!
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to restore the nose (restauracio de lu) after a fracture!
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	It seems like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a broken nose!
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	It seems like we're getting some additional instructions on how to treat a broken nose!
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	It seems like we're getting some additional information on how to treat a broken nose!
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	It seems like we're getting some final words of advice from the author!
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	It seems like we're getting some additional advice on how to treat a broken nose!
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat the nose after it has been broken!
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a broken nose with a small or comminuted fracture (si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz)!
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a wound inside the nose (si accideys plagua dedintz le nas)!
Capitol .iiii.	It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter 4!
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	A new chapter!
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a broken jaw (mandibula) when the fracture is not accompanied by a wound (plaga).
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	It seems like we're getting some specific instructions on how to treat a broken jaw (mandibula) when the fracture is not accompanied by a wound (plaga).
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a broken jaw (mandibula) when the fracture is more severe and has separated into two parts.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a broken jaw (mandibula) when there is also disruption of the teeth (conmocio de dentz a disrupcio).
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to care for the patient (malaute) after a broken jaw (mandibula).
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat the patient's appearance (figur) if it has been altered in some way.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat the patient's bone (os) and ensure that it heals properly.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat an abscess (apostema) that has developed in the patient.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a fracture with an open wound (fractura am plagua).
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a wound with a narrow opening (le orrifici de la plagua es streyt).
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat the wound after removing any debris or foreign material.
Capitol .v.	It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter 5!
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	A new chapter!
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a broken rib (furcula) that is fractured in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a broken rib (furcula) that is fractured in different ways.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to perform an operation (operacio) when the fracture is accompanied by a wound or open sore (plaga).
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to set the fracture (enguala la fractura) so that it heals properly.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to apply extension (extencio) to the patient's body.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to position the patient's body (malaute) when it's not possible to extend the ribcage (furcula) to its full extent.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to assist the patient (ministre) in elevating their ribcage (os de la furcula) when it's blocked by a tumor or other obstruction (preon).
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to deal with debris or foreign material (satagias) that has accumulated in the patient's ribcage (furcula).
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	It seems like we're getting some information on how to perform an incision (inscisio) on the patient's ribcage (os) when the debris or foreign material is stuck.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It seems like we're getting some information on the shape and size of the cutting tool (culier) used to make an incision in the patient's ribcage.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	It seems like we're getting some information on the shape and size of the cutting tool (culier) used to make an incision in the patient's ribcage.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to close a wound (plauga) after removing debris or foreign material from the patient's ribcage.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a wound (plauga) after removing debris or foreign material from the patient's ribcage.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat an abscess (apostema) that has formed in the patient's ribcage.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a fracture (strictura) in the patient's ribcage.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	It seems like we're getting some additional information on how to care for the patient's fractured ribcage (os trencat).
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to position the patient (malaute) during sleep.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	It seems like we're getting some information on the duration of the treatment.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to update the dressing (emplastre) used to treat the patient's fractured ribcage.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	It seems like we're getting some information on the duration of the healing process.
Capitol .vi.	It seems like we've reached the end of the text. The "Capitol" refers to a chapter or section title, indicating that there are multiple sections or chapters within the text.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	It seems like we've reached the end of the text, and it appears that the title is "De restauracio de fractura de la spalla", which translates to "On the Treatment of Shoulder Fractures".
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a fracture in the scapula (tart).
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a fracture in the scapula (tart) where it's broken at the middle of the bone (mieg loc de lu).
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to prepare the area for treatment and apply a dressing.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	It seems like we're getting some additional information on how to prepare the area for treatment and apply a dressing.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to apply the dressing and secure it in place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to check and maintain the dressing.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to position the patient.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	It seems like we're getting some information on the expected recovery time for a fractured scapula (spatula).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to remove the dressing (liament) once the scapula has fully healed.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a complication that can arise when removing the dressing (codena) after a scapula fracture.
Capitol .vii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The "Capitol" refers to a chapter or section title, indicating that there are multiple sections or chapters within the text.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	It looks like we've reached a new chapter in the text!
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	It looks like we're getting some information on the diagnosis and characteristics of fractures of the foot (pietz).
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	It looks like we're getting some information on the symptoms and consequences of a fracture in the middle of the foot (delos accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu).
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	It looks like we're getting some information on the treatment and rehabilitation process for a fracture in the middle of the foot (La restauracio de lu).
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to apply and secure the dressing (emplastre) over the fracture site.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting some information on what to do if complications arise during the treatment of a fracture in the foot.
Capitol .viii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The "Capitol" refers to a chapter or section title, indicating that there are multiple sections or chapters within the text.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	It looks like we've reached a new section of the text!
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	It looks like we're getting some information on the characteristics of rib fractures!
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to diagnose and examine a patient with a suspected rib fracture!
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to treat and rehabilitate a patient with a rib fracture!
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	It looks like we're getting some information on the symptoms and complications that can arise when a rib fracture is severe or complex.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	It looks like we've finally reached the end of the text!
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we've finally reached the end of the text!
Capitol .ix.	It looks like we've reached the beginning of a new chapter (Capitol .ix.)!
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	It looks like we're diving into a new topic: "De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col" - or, in English, "On the Treatment of Fracture of the Spine and Neck".
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	It looks like we're starting to get some specific information about the treatment of fractures in the spine and neck (spondil del dos).
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	It looks like we're getting to the heart of the matter!
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	It looks like we're getting a glimmer of hope!
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	It looks like we're getting some more insight into the diagnosis and treatment of fractures in the spine and neck (spondils del col)!
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	It looks like we're getting to the crux of the matter!
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to diagnose and treat fractures in the spine or neck!
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck!
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck!
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck!
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck!
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck!
Capitol .x.	It looks like we're moving on to the next chapter (Capitol .x.) of the ancient medical manuscript!
De restauracio de la ancha.	It looks like we're diving into a new topic - "De restauracio de la ancha"!
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	It looks like we're discussing the treatment of fractures in the spine or neck (les osses de las anchas tart so trencats)!
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck (la restauracio de lu)!
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck (E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament)!
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck (Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos)!
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck (E donc quan auras engualada aquela)!
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck (E enguala la concavitat am aquo)!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat abscesses (Mays si accideys apostema caut)!
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures (E si accideysso en le os satagias)!
Capitol .xi.	It looks like we're moving on to the next chapter (Capitol .xi.) of the ancient medical manuscript!
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	It looks like we're discussing the treatment of fractures in the arm (De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori)!
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	I think I can translate that!
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the upper arm (E si es trencat)!
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	It looks like we're getting more specific instructions on how to treat fractures in the upper arm (E si es trencat)!
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to position the injured arm (E segua le malaute sobre una sezela)!
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to treat fractures in the upper arm (E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu)!
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	It looks like we're getting another method for treating fractures in the upper arm (E l’autra manieyra es)!
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to strengthen the treatment (E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort)!
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to treat fractures near the end of a muscle (E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle)!
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to treat fractures near the shoulder blade (E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde)!
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to apply the bandage or cloth (Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal)!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to treat an abscess (Mays si accideys apostema caut)!
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to strengthen the treatment (E la manieyra de strenher aquela es)!
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to apply the cloth napkin (E pausa le drap) and strengthen the treatment (strenh sobre le adjutori le bras)!
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to use splints (E lahoras usa de stelhas)!
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to use splints (E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela)!
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to strengthen the treatment (E aprop strenh)!
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to apply the pressure (E es que la tua strictura)!
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to apply the pressure (E quant pus es alonguada la fractura)!
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to apply the treatment (E donc si vezes)!
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat an abscess (E si temes apostema caut)!
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat the injured arm (E aprop considera le liament)!
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat the injured arm (Mays si tu yest)!
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how the patient should rest (E sia la sua dormicio)!
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to care for the injured arm (E pausa sobre le adjutori)!
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to feed the patient (E pausa la vianda del malaute)!
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat the patient (Quar de constuma del adjutori)!
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat the patient (E si la fractura es layha atrita)!
Capitol .xii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	It looks like we're getting a detailed description of the arm (Bras es compost de dos osses)!
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	It looks like we're getting a description of how the arm can be injured (E fort leu es trencat)!
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (E quan es trencat)!
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (E quan es trencat)!
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (E pus mala)!
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (Donc si l’os)!
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (Mays si le focil)!
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (E si les dos focils)!
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	It looks like we're getting some detailed instructions on how to treat a broken arm (E cove que pauses)!
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	It looks like we're getting some more detailed instructions on how to treat a broken arm (E sia un coyssi)!
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	It looks like we're getting some more detailed instructions on how to treat a broken arm (E aprop le ministre)!
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a broken bone (E aprop le metge)!
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to deal with a tricky situation (E si en la factura)!
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to deal with a particularly challenging situation (E si appar en lu satagia)!
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to handle a special case (Mays si la fractura)!
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat an abscess or apostema (E si accideys apostema)!
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	It looks like we're getting some information about the types of splints or stelas that can be used to treat different types of fractures (E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas)!
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply a splint or stela (E aprop pausa)!
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to prepare the cloth or drap (E les draps) used to wrap around a fractured bone!
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to care for the patient (E considera)!
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a complication that requires correction (E si accideys alcuna causa)!
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to care for the patient (E leysses)!
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to complete the treatment (E si la extrictura)!
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to provide nutrition and support for the patient (E considera)!
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat the patient (Mays si al malaute)!
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to care for the patient (E aprop sia)!
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	It looks like we're getting some final words of wisdom on the expected recovery time for this fracture (E sapias)!
Capitol .xiii.	It looks like we're at the end of the manuscript! The last chapter is titled "Capitol.xiii."
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	It looks like we're diving into a new topic!
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	It looks like we're getting some important information about fractures in the wrist and fingers!
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture or dislocation of the wrist (E quan accideys)!
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of the wrist (E aprop le ministre)!
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply an emplastre and estopa (E lahoras cove)!
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a specific type of fracture (Mays si la trincadura)!
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply a splint (stelha) and secure it with cloth (am drap) (E sia la stelha)!
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture that occurs in the outer part of the hand (Mays si la fractura)!
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of one of the fingers (E si accideys fractura)!
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat fractures of the other fingers (Mays si la fractura)!
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	It looks like we're getting some final thoughts on the treatment of fractures and other injuries (E considera)!
Capitol .xiv.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xiv)!
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	It looks like we're diving into a new topic! The title "De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa" translates to "On the Treatment of Fractures of the Coccyx".
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	It looks like we're getting some specific information about the treatment of fractures to the coccyx (Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas)!
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of the coccyx (E la restauracio de lu)!
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of the coccyx (E aprop le ministre)!
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of the coccyx that requires additional support (Mays si es propdana)!
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	It looks like we're getting some additional instructions on how to treat a fracture of the coccyx (E semblantment si la trencadura)!
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of the coccyx (E aprop le metge)!
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat an infection (apostema) that develops after a fracture of the coccyx (Mays si accideys en lu apostema)!
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to create a splint (strictura) for the fractured coccyx (La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta)!
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to create a splint for the fractured coccyx (E intromet lonc fiel)!
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply a splint to the fractured coccyx (E aprop pausa)!
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply padding and secure the splint (E aprop uempli)!
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to create a splint (E aprop comensa)!
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to secure the splint (E aprop exten)!
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply the splint and ensure proper healing (E aprop leyssa)!
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to manage a situation where the bone is protruding (Mays si en le os es pessa)!
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply the splint (E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda)!
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to prevent complications during the treatment of a fracture (Mays empero en la restauracio de lu)!
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	It looks like we're getting some information on the expected recovery time for a fracture of the coccyx (E sapias que la coyssa)!
Capitol .xv.	It looks like we're reaching the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xv.)!
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	It looks like we're starting a new chapter in the manuscript (De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh)!
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	It looks like we're getting some information on the symptoms and complications of fractures to the coccyx (Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol)!
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	It looks like we're getting some information on the severity of fractures to the coccyx (Mays si accideys a lu fractura)!
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	It looks like we're getting some information on the treatment and restoration of fractures to the coccyx (E la restauracio de lu)!
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to apply an emplastre (a type of dressing) and a splint to the affected area (E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda)!
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to consider all the possible complications that can arise during treatment and recovery (E aprop considera)!
Capitol .xvi.	It looks like we're reaching the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xvi.)!
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	It looks like we're starting a new chapter in the manuscript (De restauracio de la fractura de la camba)!
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	It looks like we're getting some information about the anatomy of the hip bone (Sapias que en la camba)!
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	It looks like we're getting some information about the different types of fractures that can occur in the hip bone (E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura)!
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	It looks like we're getting some information about what happens when two bones in the hip joint are fractured (E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps)!
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	It looks like we're getting some information about what happens when the smaller bone in the hip joint is fractured (E si es trinquat le os pus subtil)!
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	It looks like we're getting some information about what happens when the larger bone in the hip joint is fractured (E si es trincat le os pus gros)!
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractures in the hip joint (E aprop aministra)!
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	It looks like we're getting some additional information about how to treat fractures in the hip joint (Mays empero cove)!
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to perform a surgical procedure on the hip joint (E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras)!
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a bandage or wrapping (E aprop envolopa)!
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply splints or stelhas (E aprop lias las doas stelhas)!
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a type of splint or support (E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust)!
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a type of splint or support in the case of a fracture (E majorment cove)!
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to monitor and manage the recovery process after a fracture (E aprop considera)!
Capitol .xvii.	It looks like we're reaching the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xvii.)!
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	It looks like we're getting some information about fractures affecting the ankle and foot (De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz)!
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	It looks like we're getting some information about the frequency and severity of fractures affecting the ankle and foot (Al talo no accideys fractura)!
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	It looks like we're getting some information about the treatment of fractures affecting the small bones of the foot (E si als osses del pe endeve fractura)!
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractures affecting the small bones of the foot (E aprop pausa)!
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a splint or bandage after treating a fracture (E aprop pausa emplastre)!
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a splint or bandage after treating a fracture (E aprop strenh)!
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to monitor and manage the healing process after a fracture (E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre)!
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractured toes (Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz)!
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a splint or bandage after treating a fractured toe (E aprop pausa)!
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a splint or bandage after treating multiple fractured toes (Mays si aquo que es trincat)!
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It looks like we're getting some final words of wisdom from the manuscript (E es convenient)!
Capitol .xviii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xviii.)!
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	It looks like we're getting into the final stretch of the manuscript (De fractura)!
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractures affecting the pelvis (Quan le conh de la femna es trincat)!
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractures affecting the pelvis (E aprop)!
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractures affecting the pelvis (E aprop)!
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat fractures affecting the pelvis (E fassa)!
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to use an ovine bladder as a makeshift splint (E si voles)!
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat fractures affecting the pelvis (E aprop sia)!
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to treat fractures affecting the spine (E quan le os del pentenil)!
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	It looks like we're getting some final thoughts and reflections from the author (E aquo que es)!
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to treat fractures of the penis (Mays en la vergua del home)!
Capitol .xix.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xix.)!
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to treat fractures when they are accompanied by a wound (De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua)!
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat fractures when they are accompanied by a wound, and particularly when the fracture involves a large bone such as the pelvis or femur (Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua)!
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage bleeding wounds (E si la plagua eflueys sanc)!
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat fractures (E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura)!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat abscesses (Mays si accideys apostema)!
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to treat fractures of the spine (Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert)!
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to use a specific instrument, likely a type of forceps or clamp, to reduce and align the fractured bone (Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas)!
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to perform the operation (E sia redon)!
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	It looks like we're getting some information on the physical characteristics of the patient (E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz)!
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	It looks like we're reaching the end of the manuscript (E aquesta es la forma de lu)!
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It looks like we're getting a quote in Greek (E es nompnat en grec)!
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to position the patient's extremity (Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu)!
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to apply pressure and realign the bone (E inpelleys aquel)!
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to realign the fractured bone (E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz)!
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to handle situations where the bone cannot be fully reduced (Mays si no podes reduzir le os)!
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to remove the remaining bone fragments (E aprop ratz aquel)!
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to assess the outcome of the treatment (E cum le os es reduzit)!
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to apply a dressing (Cum es complida la tua restauracio)!
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to administer stitches and apply dressings (E aprop aministra stelas)!
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to avoid causing further harm (E guarda te am tota cautela)!
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to recognize and diagnose the type of fracture (E si la tieua strictura)!
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage severe wounds (E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala)!
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage wound care (E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes)!
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage the recovery process (E conveneys a tu)!
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to assess the progress of a wound (si a la plagua passan motz dias)!
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage abscesses (E de aquelas satagias)!
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage infection or corruption (E si accideys a la plagua)!
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage the treatment of fractures (E de aquo en le qual cove)! It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage the treatment of wounds (e lahoras cura la plagua)!
Capitol .xx.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	It looks like we're starting a new chapter (Capitol .xx.) that focuses on the treatment of swelling or edema that can occur in the aftermath of a fracture!
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	It looks like we're diving into the discussion of swelling (nodacio) that can occur after a fracture!
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	It looks like we're getting some practical advice on how to manage swelling (nodacio) after a fracture!
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	It looks like we're getting some more advice on how to manage swelling (nodacio) after a fracture!
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting some more advice on how to manage swelling (nodacio) after a fracture!
Capitol .xxi.	It looks like we're reaching the end of this manuscript!
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process after a fracture!
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	It looks like we're getting some additional advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process after a fracture!
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to promote healing and recovery after a fracture!
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to promote healing and recovery after a fracture!
Capitol .xxii.	It looks like we're reaching the end of this manuscript!
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the healing process of fractured bones!
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process of a fractured limb!
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process of a fractured limb!
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage swelling and bruising after a fracture!
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process of a fractured limb!
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process of a fractured limb!
Capitol .xxiii.	It looks like we've reached the end of this ancient medical manuscript!
De sermo en dislocacio.	It looks like we're diving into a new topic: De sermo en dislocacio, which translates to "On Dislocation".
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	It looks like we're diving into a discussion about joint dislocation!
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage joint dislocations!
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the pain and discomfort associated with joint dislocations!
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the healing process after a joint dislocation!
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	It looks like we're getting some final advice on how to manage the healing process after a joint dislocation!
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to organize the chapters of this ancient medical manuscript!
Capitol .xxiiii.	It looks like we've reached the end of this ancient medical manuscript!
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	It looks like we're getting into some specific advice on how to treat a dislocation of the jawbone (mandibula).
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	It looks like we're getting into some specific advice on how to treat a dislocation of the jawbone (mandibula).
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat a minor jawbone dislocation.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat a more severe jawbone dislocation.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to perform a jawbone reduction (reduccio) for a dislocated jaw.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage a difficult jawbone reduction (reduccio) when both mandibulas are dislocated.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat the patient after the jawbone reduction (reduccio) is complete.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to care for the patient after the jawbone reduction (reduccio) is complete.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to help the patient recover from the jawbone reduction (reduccio) procedure.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage a difficult situation where two jawbones (mandibulas) are dislocated and not returning to their normal positions.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to recognize the importance of proper treatment for jawbone dislocations.
Capitol .xxv.	It looks like we've reached the end of this ancient medical manuscript!
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	It looks like we're getting into some specific advice on how to treat a dislocation of the clavicle (furcula) and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	It looks like we're getting some specific information about the clavicle (furcula) and its relationship to the lat muscles.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to restore the patient's comfort and mobility after a dislocation of the clavicle.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manipulate the clavicle back into place after a dislocation.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat the patient's clavicle after a dislocation.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat the end of the clavicle that is not dislocated, but rather stuck in place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat the patient's clavicle after a dislocation or stuck condition.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat the end of the muscle that has become separated from its normal location.
Capitol .xxvi.	It looks like we've reached the end of this ancient medical manuscript!
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	It looks like we're getting into some specific advice on how to reduce a dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	It looks like we're getting some specific information about how muscles can become dislocated.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	It looks like we're getting more information about how muscles can become dislocated.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	It looks like we're getting some more information about how muscles can become dislocated.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	It looks like we're getting some information about what can happen when a muscle becomes dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat a dislocated muscle.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to recognize and distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a normal muscle.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to recognize a dislocated muscle.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated muscle.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to reduce (put back into place) a dislocated muscle.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	It looks like we're getting some information about what to do if the muscle doesn't return to its normal position after treatment.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated muscle.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to reduce (put back into place) a dislocated muscle.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated muscle that is not too severe.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to reduce (put back into place) a dislocated muscle using a different method.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated muscle that is difficult to reduce.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply the beam treatment.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply the beam treatment.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply the beam treatment.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated muscle.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to promote healing in a dislocated muscle.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to promote healing in a dislocated muscle.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated joint.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	It looks like we're getting some information about the consequences of not properly treating a dislocated joint.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to reduce a dislocated joint.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated joint.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to promote healing in a dislocated joint.
Capitol .xxvii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The last line says:
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	It looks like we've reached the title of a new chapter! The text says:
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	It looks like we're getting some information about the nature of a dislocated knee joint.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	It looks like we're getting some information about the importance of prompt reduction and treatment in cases of knee joint dislocation.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	It looks like we're getting some information about the process of reducing a dislocated knee joint.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	It looks like we're getting some additional information about the process of reducing a dislocated knee joint.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	It looks like we're getting some information about what to do if the dislocation doesn't respond to reduction.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	It looks like we're getting some information about the process of extending a dislocated knee joint.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	It looks like we're getting some information about the process of wrapping a dislocated knee joint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	It looks like we're getting some information about the process of reducing a dislocated knee joint.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	It looks like we're getting some information about the post-reduction care for a dislocated knee joint.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	It looks like we're getting some information about the final stages of treatment for a dislocated knee joint.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	It looks like we're getting some information about what to do if the joint doesn't seem to be healing properly.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated joint that is experiencing gravity or weight-related issues.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated joint that is experiencing movement-related issues.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred on the inner surface of the wound, up to where it is linen.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated joint using a cow's hide (fenda de vaca) and heat.
Capitol .xxviii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The final title!
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	It looks like we're getting some information about the treatment of a dislocated wrist joint (malassen).
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to reduce a dislocated wrist joint (malassen).
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	It looks like we're getting some additional information about how to reduce a dislocated wrist joint (malassen).
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to handle the situation if the dislocation doesn't reduce immediately.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to handle a wrist joint that is not reducing properly.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to care for the wrist joint after it has been dislocated and reduced.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to handle a situation where the wrist joint is not moving properly and causing discomfort.
Capitol .xxix.	We've reached the end of the text!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The final title!
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat finger dislocations!
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat finger dislocations that occur at the base of the palm or in the wrist area!
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to care for the finger after it has been manipulated back into place!
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to progress with finger care after the initial stabilization period!
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to continue caring for the finger after it has been mobilized!
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to care for a wrist dislocation!
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	It looks like we're getting some information about how to care for wrist dislocations in other areas!
Capitol .xxx.	We've reached the end of the text!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The final title!
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	The final sentence!
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The final sentence!
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	The final sentence!
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The final sentence!
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	The final paragraph!
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	The final sentence!
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The final sentence!
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The final sentence!
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	The final sentence!
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The final sentence!
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The final sentence!
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The final sentence!
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	The final sentence!
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The final sentence!
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	The final sentence!
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	The final sentence!
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	The final sentence!
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The final sentence!
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	The final sentence!
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	The final sentence!
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	The final sentence!
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	The final sentence!
Capitol .xxxi.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De curacio de anca dislocada.	The title!
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	The final sentence!
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The final sentence!
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The final sentence!
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The final sentence!
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The final sentence!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The final sentence!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The final sentence!
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The final paragraph!
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	The final paragraph!
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	The final sentence!
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The final sentence!
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The final sentence!
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	The final sentence!
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	The final sentence!
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	The final paragraph!
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	The final sentence!
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	The final sentence!
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	The final sentence!
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	The final sentence!
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The final sentence!
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The final sentence!
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	The final sentence!
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	The final sentence!
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	The final sentence!
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	The final sentence!
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	The final sentence!
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	The final paragraph!
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	The final paragraph!
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	The final instruction!
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	The final instructions!
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	The final sentence!
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	The final sentence!
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	The final instruction!
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	The final sentence!
Capitol .xxxii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	It looks like we're diving into the specifics of hip joint dislocation!
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	It looks like we're discussing the signs and symptoms of hip joint dislocation!
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	It looks like we're discussing the steps to restore a dislocated hip joint!
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	It looks like we're discussing the signs of a successfully reduced dislocation!
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	It looks like we're discussing the post-reduction care for a dislocated hip joint!
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of rest and recovery after a dislocation!
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper stretching and rehabilitation after a dislocation!
Capitol .xxxiii.	We've reached the end of the text!
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	A new chapter!
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	It looks like we're discussing the causes and types of ankle dislocations!
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	It looks like we're discussing the signs of ankle dislocation!
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	It looks like we're discussing the treatment of ankle dislocation!
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	It looks like we're discussing the treatment of ankle dislocation when it's a more severe case (segunda compliment)!
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	It looks like we're getting into the nitty-gritty of ankle dislocation treatment!
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	It looks like we're getting into the nitty-gritty of ankle dislocation treatment!
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	The final instruction!
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	The final instruction!
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	The final message!
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	The final caution!
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The final instructions!
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The final instructions!
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	The final instructions!
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	The final caution!
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	The final instruction!
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	The final instruction!
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	The final warning!
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	The final warning!
Capitol .xxxiiii.	We've reached the end of the medieval medical text on treating dislocated ankles!
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The final topic!
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The first instruction!
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	Another instruction!
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Another instruction!
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	The final instruction!
Capitol .xxxv.	We've reached the end of the medieval medical text on treating dislocated ankles!
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	The final topic!
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	The final warning!
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	The final words of wisdom!
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	The final instruction!
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	The final instruction!
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	The final instruction!
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	The final words of wisdom!
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	The final words!
Amen.	Amen indeed!
